Title: CS 6120: Lesson 3: Local Optimization & Dead Code Elimination
Video ID: 1_6k52flbg
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

Today we're going to dive in and write our first compiler optimization. We're going to start with a few simple optimizations around the theme of dead code elimination. But before we do that, I want to give some framing for different kinds of optimizations we'll study in 6.1.20. The difference is between how we deal with control flow in the program. So you'll remember from last time that we started drawing control flow graphs. That is, breaking up programs from just sequences of instructions to these graphs, indicating basic blocks and how control transfers between the basic blocks. So here's a sample CFG. At a very high level in this class, we're going to categorize optimizations into three different categories. Local optimizations work within a single basic block. That means they don't have to deal with control flow. They just have to deal with the ordering of instructions in a sort of linear scan. Global optimizations work on an entire function. This means they have to deal with control flow. And as we will demonstrate in this video and the next one, dealing with control flow makes optimizations, typically speaking, much more complicated. Finally, there's a third category of optimizations we'll get to later in this semester, which has to deal with multiple functions. And those things are called interprocedural optimizations. Local and global optimizations can also be called intraprocedural, especially if you spell it correctly. But the words interprocedural and intraprocedural sound so incredibly similar to each other that it's more useful to say local and global when you're referring to things that work within the scope of a single function. But one thing to remember is that when you say global, you might think that, well, global, that means the entire program. That's not what people mean. By global optimizations, people mean global with respect to a single function. Interprocedural optimizations are an even fancier level that goes beyond global and looks at calls from one function to another. So this basic block, for example, had a call to this function. We'd have to sort of reason about those calls. When we're doing global optimization, we don't even reason about calls. We're going to start out by thinking locally, that is within a single basic block. We will also see some optimizations that apply globally to the entire function in a kind of trivial way first. And then later in a few more lessons, we're going to see more sophisticated ways to reason globally, that is to reason about control flow. And I hope that one of the things you'll take away from this video is understanding what the fundamental shift in thinking is that has to happen when you transition from thinking within a single basic block to thinking about an entire CFG. Let's start out by looking at a braille program that's possible to optimize. We're going to start out by thinking about dead code elimination, which is a simple kind of optimization that removes code that can't possibly have an effect on the output, thereby making the program faster. I hope you're getting more familiar with braille programs and this instruction-based syntax and the semantics of the various instructions. So I hope you're able to understand this simple program that just has a couple of adds of constants. And my question to you is, what should we do to this program in order to make it faster? Where is the optimization opportunity? Of course, it's not too hard to see. There is this one instruction here, this assignment to the variable C, that is never used anywhere in the program. And so it's possible to delete this instruction and to get an equivalent program that runs faster. That is, it uses one less instruction when executing, but does exactly the same thing. So the next question I have for you is, what is the general principle, that is, can you phrase it in a sentence, for what opportunities exist like this one for optimizing braille programs? That is, if we were to implement an optimization, what would we be looking for? Try to phrase that in a sentence. Try actually writing it down. Here's how I would phrase it. We can delete any instruction that assigns to a variable that is never used as an argument anywhere in the function, as long as that instruction has no side effects. By side effects, I just mean that we shouldn't eliminate instructions that don't seem to assign to a variable, and yet they have an effect on the outside world. For example, braille has a print instruction. You can say like print C, for example, and it shouldn't be penalized for the fact that it doesn't assign to a variable, and therefore it seems to be dead because it doesn't produce any values used elsewhere. The criterion that we can use to do some dead code elimination is just to eliminate every instruction that has this pure semantics that all it does is assign to a variable, and that variable is never used by any instruction everywhere in the entire program. Therefore, this is a global property. We've come up with the framework, at least for a global optimization, that needs to look at the entire function. We happen to be looking at a function here that only has one basic block, but this is a global property. It's not possible to implement by looking at a single basic block. It's possible that you don't use C in this basic block, but in a larger function, for example, then you jump to another basic block that does use C. Therefore, this is a global property. To turn this into a real optimization, I would like you to now try writing the pseudocode for an optimization that carries out these instructions, that is, that analyzes a program and deletes every instruction that is dead by this definition of assigned to a variable that is never used anywhere and also not having any side effects within the instruction. Go for it. Here's my pseudocode. It works in a kind of two-pass style. There are two loops. The first loop loops over all the instructions and accumulates a big set of all the variables that are ever used anywhere in the function. The second loop goes over all the instructions a second time and looks for instructions that have a destination and that destination is not in the used set, and it deletes those instructions. This relies on a simple property about braille, which is that the instructions, the operations that are built into the standard braille don't have side effects if they assign to a value. That is, they can do one of two things. Either they are effect operations that don't produce results or they're value operations that don't have side effects and they only produce results. This is true of the basic braille instructions. If we're to make more complicated instructions, we'd have to think more carefully about what the side effects of instructions are. But for example, the print statement doesn't have a destination field. It doesn't assign to anything. So the print instructions won't have a destination and therefore we will never delete those instructions. So that's a really simple implementation of our very first optimization. Great work! I want to now show you a second program that we're going to want to worry about how to optimize. As a first step for this program, I want you to try in your mind running your pseudocode for dead code elimination on this program. Do that now and figure out which instructions it would delete. My implementation at least would delete only this instruction. That is, this is the only instruction that's unused. And the tricky thing about this is that by thinking with your human brain, you can also realize that this instruction is also needless because it feeds into instruction that is never used anywhere. But it doesn't meet the criterion that I set out in my pseudocode. That is, this instruction, the one that assigns to C, it doesn't have the property that it is never used in any instruction ever. So it's sort of disappointing. We know there is more opportunity to optimize here than we are giving credit for. That is, we're unable to do an optimization we'd like to do. So now I would like you to think for a second about how you can rectify this, how you can take the pseudocode that we wrote for simple dead code elimination and make it slightly more powerful to capture this case as well as the previous case. There are several ways to do it, but there's one way that's particularly easy, which is just to do the same thing multiple times. That is to run the algorithm repeatedly until it converges. And by that I just mean in
