Title: CS 6120: Lesson 12: Program Synthesis
Video ID: 1_mxclvd8z
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

Program synthesis is a term for a very broad set of techniques that try to automatically generate a program that fits a specification. So the idea is you feed in just a specification of what you want the program to do, and you get a program out of the program synthesizer. There's a lot hidden in the notion of what makes a specification, and it's interpreted very broadly. Sometimes people mean, like, a logical relationship between the input and output of the function. Sometimes people mean just a few examples, and the synthesizer's job is to fill in the rest of the details. It goes all the way to saying that we're going to synthesize programs from natural language. This sounds sort of like science fiction, that we're just going to give a description, like a logical formula, and get a sequence of machine instructions out, or, like, give a very precise type for a function and get an OCaml function out, but it's an active area of research because it sounds so exciting. A cartoony understanding of what program synthesis is capable of is that it's going to take away all our jobs as programmers. That doesn't seem very likely to me, but it doesn't mean that program synthesis is totally a fiction, even today. There's lots of examples of more constrained domains where automatically generating programs from some form of specification can be extremely helpful. A common pattern is that you have a really restricted set of semantics that is a very domain-specific language, and it takes considerable effort, nonetheless, to kind of navigate that space, and there's sort of an easier way for the programmer to express their intent. A very famous deployed example of program synthesis, for instance, is the Flash Fill feature in Excel, which will take a few examples and try to guess the formula you are trying to write to relate the inputs to the outputs. I think that at first, the idea of program synthesis can seem sort of like magic. We're using fancy tools like automatic theorem provers, we're using complicated search space techniques, and somehow we go from something that doesn't look like a program at all to coming up with a program more or less from scratch. However, I actually don't think that the basics of doing program synthesis, especially when aided by really great off-the-shelf automated reasoning tools, are all that complicated. The basics of program synthesis are not magical at all. In this lesson, we'll go through the construction of a basic program synthesizer more or less from scratch. We're going to go through this blog post that I wrote a couple of years ago entitled Program Synthesis is Possible. I wrote this blog post as a unit for lessons in program languages in compiler's classes. This will guide you through constructing a program synthesis tool, and I encourage you to pause this video often to catch up and do the programming yourself. You can also find my full implementation online on GitHub if you want, but I think it's more instructive to go through the motions and constructing it from scratch. I'm going to do this with Python, but you can use whatever tools you want. Python will make it possible to follow my instructions literally. Okay, so when I said we were going to start from scratch, I was pretty much lying, because we're actually going to start with an extremely powerful off-the-shelf open source tool called a Satisfiability Modulo Theories Solver, or SMT solver, known as Z3 out of Microsoft research. SMT solvers are a foundation of a lot of modern synthesis techniques. We're going to see how to take a theorem prover and use it to build a program synthesizer. The first step in this lesson, therefore, is to install Z3. For following along in Python, you'll also need the Z3 bindings. It's not that hard. Z3 is a reasonably popular package, so you can find it in most package managers already. You probably don't need to compile it from source. For example, I'm doing this on a Mac, so I can just do brew install Z3, and I should be good to go. At this point, it should be possible to launch a Python interpreter and type import Z3 without getting an error, and that will give us a convenient interface to using Z3. Z3, like any SMT solver, works by taking in a logical formula and saying whether it's satisfiable or unsatisfiable. It can also, of course, time out, and then we don't get a useful answer. SMT is like SAT in the sense that we're trying to solve a satisfiability query, but SAT just works on Boolean formulas where all of the variables can just be true or false. SMT solvers augment a SAT-like framework with Boolean variables and and and or and implication and stuff, but with something called theories. Theories are domains of variables and the operations of those variables that can be involved in your query. So, for example, you can say that X is greater than Y, where X and Y are both integers, or you can say that like A plus B equals C, where A, B, and C are all 32-bit floating point numbers. The integers and the floating point numbers, those are theories that get plugged into a SAT-like framework to make an SMT solver, and it's all those theories that make SMT solvers so useful for reasoning about program semantics. I'm first going to demonstrate to you what SMT solvers, and Z3 in particular, are capable of, just by themselves, just when issuing queries, and to be honest, I'm constantly shocked by the insights that modern SMT solvers are able to come up with relatively quickly. Then the next step will be to see how to take SMT queries and turn them into actual program synthesis. All right, let's get started with just an empty Python program, and I'll type import Z3 to get started. The Z3 Python bindings have a bunch of convenient operator overloads for writing SMT formulas. The way you get started is by declaring a variable first. So if I say z3.capital int and I give it a name, this declares an SMT variable named x that is of type int, that uses the integer theory in the Z3 SMT solver. Now you can do things like, say, if you just divide this by 7, that doesn't actually do a division, we've overloaded, or Z3's Python bindings have overloaded the division operator to instead say, create me a formula that does a division of the SMT variable x divided by 7. So I can just bind the result of this thing, which again is a formula object, to a variable, and I'll just try printing that out for now. So if I run that, I get the formula x divided by 7 in a completely unsurprising way. I can also, to make this into a Boolean formula that can actually be satisfiable or not, I can use double equals. Again, that's overloaded, and we'll get the formula that is true if for all values of x when divided by 7 equals 6. So now it would be great if we could solve this, that is ask for a value of x that makes this thing true. And that is what the SMT solver is for, of course. So we can just write a little function here to do the dance to invoke Z3 in the most straightforward possible way. We need to create a solver, add a formula to it, and then check, the check method runs the solver to see if this thing is satisfiable or not, and then return s.model. The model is just the name for the valuation of the formula. That is, for a satisfiable formula, and I'm going to hope that all the formulas I feed in here are satisfiable, what are the values of the variables that make it true, that are sort of a certificate that the formula is satisfiable. So I'll do the standard Python thing for having an actual program here with a main. So instead of just printing out this formula, now I can print out the solution to this formula. So this will run the solver and get the model and tell me an appropriate value of x. x is 42, just as I hoped. Fantastic! So this, I hope, gives you a view into the power of SMT solvers. You can write these sort of SAT-like logical queries that can be kind of sort of arbitrarily connected with Boolean connectors that do comparisons of actual variables, and you can ask it for valuations of those variables that make them true. For this tutorial, instead of using integers, I'm going to use the theory of bit vectors. Bit vectors are, instead of idealized integers that can go off into infinity, bit vectors are sort of finite representations like we have in actual computers. So instead of using int, we can also do, we can have, we can write, for example, that y is a bit vector named y. Here y is a collection of eight bits that we can treat as an integer. So for example, we can say y shifted left by three, which is a thing you can do to bit vectors, equals 40. And we can just, if we want to know what value of y makes that work, we can print the solution to this formula. Awesome! Another thing that makes SMT solvers super useful is that they also, they have quantifiers. That is, you're not just stuck by saying find me some value of y that makes this sort of like top-level quantified formula true. We can write things like for all and there exists. So for example, the way that you do for all is to say z3.for all, and then you have two arguments here. We need to give it a list of variables we want to quantify over and then a sub-formula. So I'll say that, like, I'll start with, I'll go back to integers just for this example, z3.int z. I'll make two variables this way. It's often convenient to like create variables and then bind them to actual Python variables for constructing formulas. So we do this. I want to find a value that for all z's, we have z times n is equal to z. So I wonder what that value could possibly be. I would like to know, I would like to know what the n is that makes this true for all possible z's. I'll bind that to the formula, I suppose, and then print out the solution here. And totally unsurprisingly, it tells us that an example of an n that makes this true is one. That is, everything times one equals itself, which you probably guessed already, but z3 knows that too. Okay, so now you understand SMT all by itself. Now I want to flip over and turn these SMT formulas into something that feels more like a proper program synthesizer. I said up top that program synthesizers have many different definitions of what they mean by specification. Program synthesis is supposed to take in some sort of specification and generate a program. What we're going to use as a specification is a reference program. That is, we're going to take in an existing program. We're going to try to find an equivalent program that hopefully runs faster. We're going to use this with a further piece of information called a sketch. Sketch based program synthesis takes in a partial program and tries to complete it. This can make it a lot easier to find a program than trying to synthesize an entire program from scratch. EZ is good for SMT solvers that need to quantify over all possible expressions. So to motivate this, I'm going to try to synthesize faster versions of programs that use bit twiddling instead of arithmetic. So for example, you probably know that if you write x times two, where x is a bit vector that is like an actual computer integer, that's the same as shifting x left by one. Let's imagine we're in a scenario where we want to do multiplications, but we can't remember what the rule is. We just can remember that we want to do left shifts, but we don't know by how much. So this is going to ask questions like this. That is, we will say, here's our reference program. It's x times two. I know there's a faster program that does exactly the same thing as this. That is, it's perfectly equivalent and it looks like this. X shifted left by something. The question question mark question mark thing here is often called a whole in sketch based synthesis. And we want to guess a value for the whole that is an expression to put here that makes this true. This is our program synthesis task for this tutorial. Here's how to make it work in the most basic setting. We're going to set up a couple of formulas that represent the reference implementation and the sketch that we want to fill in. So I'll start with trying to just write down the reference implementation. And we'll need to do this in an SMT formula. So we need to declare the bit vector variable that we just as we did before when constructing individual queries. And then I'll say that my slow expression, that is the program, the reference program that we're going to use here, that's just x times two. Okay. So now I need the sketch. That is the fast program that we want to complete. For that, I'm going to create a whole. I'll call it H because you can't call variables question mark question mark, but believe me, I would if I could in Python. So this is supposed to be the whole that we're trying to fill in. So the fast expression, that's the sketch, is going to be x shifted left by H. And our question is going to be what is the H that makes us equivalent to the other program? So we have these two expressions. We now need to construct one formula that we can pass over to the SMT solver to ask it to complete the sketch. We can use quantifiers to do this. What we need is a for all. That is something to say for all possible values of x, these two things are equivalent to each other. So I'll say for all x, that is for all the free variables that you think of as inputs to the expression. We want it to be the case that the value of the slow expression is equal to the fast expression. I want to remind you that there is no actual comparison going on here. This is an overloaded double equals that is not saying this expression is equal to this expression, yes or no. It's returning a new formula that we will then solve. So this is overloaded, taken two formulas and produce a new one that's connected by double equals that will then hand over to z3. So this thing is not true or false. It's just also a formula. I can't stress this enough, operator overloading is magical and amazing, but it can also be a little bit confusing. So this is the goal formula that we actually want. That is, we want to find a value of h that makes this true for all x's. If we can do that, then we will have completed the program. That is, we'll have done a really basic form of program synthesis, filling in the hole to get us a program that matches our specification in the form of a reference program. So let me solve this and see what we get. Yay! One! Great! We can even try this a few more times, like what is when you do x times four? What is that equivalent to shifting left by two? Fantastic! So I think this is working. That is, in a weird way, if you kind of squint, we kind of have a program synthesis thing going. I have to admit though, this doesn't really feel all that much like program synthesis because there's not really a programming language going on here. All we're doing is writing Python expressions that turn into z3 expressions and then solving that stuff. So the next step is to turn this into operating on something that feels a little bit more like a real programming language with a real interpreter and stuff. I'm going to give you a moment now to pause and catch up, however, and play around z3 and see what it can do. I challenge you, for example, to find a formula that makes z3 take a really long time. That is, to think more than just like a couple of milliseconds like it has so far. See what the limits are here for the questions that you can ask z3 and get results in a reasonable amount of time. So the first step in making this kind of manual manipulation of formulas feel more like we're doing real program synthesis on a real programming language is to have an actual language. And for that, of course, we will need the most fascinating topic in all of compilers, which is a parser. We'll need a parser for the programming language that we're synthesizing. I'm going to fast forward a little bit here. I have a pre-written parser. If you want, you can use the same parsing library that I used called Lark. Lark is pretty cool. It's got like several different parsing algorithms built in, and I find its syntax for defining grammars really straightforward. So here's the grammar that I've pre-written. It looks like this. So we're going to have a grammar that just looks like little arithmetic expressions. So we will have add and subtract and multiply, divide, shift left and shift right. And then I'll have negation. Anyway, just like arithmetic on bid vectors is all that this little tiny language can do. I'll also add in these ifs, that is these ternary expressions. So like an expression, question mark expression, colon, another expression that means if this is non-zero, then use this, otherwise use this. So now that I have a grammar for this, I will change my main down here to use the grammar to parse programs that come from strings. So I can just say like, here's my parser. Great. Lark. Give it a grammar. For example, I'll just say like x times three and that whole thing shifted left by y. Great. Okay. Excellent program. We can print this out to just convince you that my parser is working. Of course, you will need to install Lark, which I will warn you is not called Lark in the Python package index. It's called Lark parser. Okay. So now I have this tree. So I just have a little syntax tree for this tiny program language. The next thing that you have when you're conjuring a program language from scratch is probably an interpreter. So we will write an interpreter too. I'll just write an interpreter that just works as simply as possible. So we take in one of these trees that like at the top is a shift left, and then it has some children here. And I will also start out that way. That is I'll just say that like we can say tree.data. We can say like if tree.data equals add, then the left-hand side is like of tree.children zero. And the right-hand side is the result of recursively calling this interpreter on tree.children one, especially if you spell children correctly. Then we will just return LHS plus RHS because we're in the add case. I'm also going to fast forward a little bit here and make things and fill in a bunch of these cases of the interpreter. But we're just doing nothing fancy, nothing you haven't seen before. I'm just going to write a completely normal interpreter that just like uses recursive invocation on this stuff. I'm going to copy and paste all this. Okay, so the only interesting thing is I've covered add mole sub div, shift left, shift right, all the kind of like ordinary binary operators. I have the negation operator. I have literal numbers so that we just like take the string from the syntax tree and return the integer value of that thing. We will also have a variable lookup. So here's the first place where things get a little bit tricky. I'm going to make this interpreter function take in a lookup function to tell us what to do with variables. And I'm just going to call that function on the name of the variable. So this is not doing anything fancy. We're just using a lookup function as a map to resolve the names of variables in our interpreter. The next thing I will do is implement conditionals. Conditions I'm going to do in a slightly weird way that I will reveal to you the purpose of later. But the actual mechanics of doing interpretation are not that odd. We have to recursively evaluate the condition, the true branch and the false branch. And then I'm going to do this odd thing with like comparisons and multiplication that is multiplying the result of comparing the condition with zero in order to get the result that I want. I know this looks a little bit odd, but you can stare at this for a moment and convince yourself that it is in fact doing an if. It is working like an interpreter for this language. So if you are convinced of that, then we can interpret this little expression that I wrote down here. That is if I can come up with a, I need to, I want to interpret this tree, but I need like some way, some function to look up the values of X and Y. This isn't terribly meaningful if I don't have a value of X and Y. So for that, I guess I'll make a little environment dictionary that says like X is two and Y is nine for some reason. And we'll do like, we'll now create a function that can be called on this. So I'll just say like for some variable, just look that thing up in the environment. So if we do this, I should be able to now interpret this expression that I just wrote and get an actual value back. It worked. Great. Okay. So now we have an interpreter. This is just a little detour to just conjure an actual language that we're going to do synthesis on. Now comes some truly funky magic that's going to rely on Python and operator overloading to make this work. We're going to take this interpreter and we're going to, in one fell swoop, transform it into a constraint generator. That is what we have here so far is an invocation of an interpreter that runs expressions on actual concrete values, actual numbers, like two and nine. What we actually want to do is run the same interpreter, but run it on symbolic values. That is on Z three variables. So we'll say we'll give it a variable named X and a variable named Y and ask the interpreter to build up a formula that has equivalent semantics to the way that we interpreted this function. So the trick that we need here is that instead of giving an actual environment, we're going to give it a lookup variable that every time you create, every time you reference a variable, it conjures out of nowhere a Z three variable that corresponds to that variable in our programming language. So to do that, I'll just say like given the name of the variable, I'll just say invoke the Z three library and say, we'll make a bit vector variable there with that name and an eight bit size. This means that when I feed this variable that comes from the var rule, that is like we'll just return that here in the interpreter, then eventually through a recursive call, we'll do something like multiplying or shifting by left, something involving a constant on one side and a variable on the other side. Then as you saw before, through the magic of operator overloading, this doesn't actually do a shift left by some number. It just creates a new formula that represents a shift left that then we can ship off to Z three to solve. So if I run this now, we won't get the number 3072. I took out all the actual numbers from the environment down here. Instead, we should get a Z three formula that represents the semantics of this program for an arbitrary X and Y variable. And in fact, we do. It looks like this. It looks exactly like the input, but it means something very different. Now this is representation of the Now this is representation of the semantics of the program as an SMT formula. And that's the key. That's what we need in order to do synthesis on this program language by a sort of reinterpretation of the interpreter as a constraint generator. We are almost there. We're just now going to bring back that sketch based synthesis paradigm that you saw a moment ago with the programs with holes and put it now into this language. The way that I wanted this to work is I'm going to have two different programs both written in the same language, both parsed in the same way. So I'll say that we'll start with a slow program that we want to find a faster implementation of. And I'll say that we'll just do like X times 10 for now. And the fast program that we want to, this is the sketch we want to fill the holes in for, is going to work by shifting left by something and adding and shifting left by another thing. So this is like upping the difficulty a tiny bit from before. It's kind of like hard to remember exactly what you have to like add together, what two different shifts you need to do to get something that's a non-power of two. Instead of using double question marks though to just be able to reuse exactly the same grammar I had before, I'm going to introduce a naming convention that says that anything beginning with an H, that's considered a hole. And that way we can tell these two holes apart from each other. I'll call it H1 for the first hole and H2 for the second hole. That we'll need to use to try to fill in all the like H starting variables in the second program to make it equivalent to the first program. So to do that I'll just parse both of these things. And I want to run our symbolic interpreter, that is our normal interpreter with symbolic values for all the variables on it. I wrote a little convenience function for myself to do this that you can find in the second example file here called like the 3xper, I think it's called. Anyway, I'll steal this from my pre-written one. This function is not fancy. It takes in the tree that you want to interpret, and then optionally you can supply existing variables to the interpretation. Otherwise it just like lazily creates a variable every time it gets referenced for the first time. So that just invokes the interpreter with this special lookup function that does that lazy creation of variables and then gives you back the set of variables that we're using, with the new ones that were added by evaluating lazily adding variables from the expression. So we can do that. So we can just say z3xper on both of these things. And we should have the two programs that we want to make equivalent. The next step is just a little bit of trickery to pull out the holes from these things. That is, we'll get the variables here, then we will call those like the variables for program one, and then like feed variables one into here, and I'll get variables two out with the updated stuff. So what I want is the variables without all the holes. So I want like x in this example, or y if we use it, but not h1 and h2. So for that I'll just do a little bit of Python trickery to construct a dictionary. So it starts with h just means that it's like h1 or something. That's just an operation on the string name of the variable. Now we need to concoct the formula that we want to give to z3. This is going to look just like before. We need to for all all the variables, just now for all the variables instead of just for x. So z3.for all. So that's all the things like x, for example, in here. And I'll say I want the slow program to equal the fast program for all those variables. And again, this is constructing a formula that sets those two things as equal to each other. So all I really need to do now is to solve the goal. And I've done that, I will have values for all of the variables. So this tells me that I can get the same effect as multiplying x by 10 if I first shift it left by one and then add that to shifting it right to left by three. That's awesome. We now have an actual program synthesizer. I can ask, for example, if it's possible to do this for 12. It tells me that yes, it is. 11. No, this says model not available because this was unsat. That is, the formula is not satisfiable, so there is no combination of holes that you can use to fill this in. I've done just a couple of fancier things in the actual thing called x2 here. x2 does exactly the same lazy setup here and does the same synthesis goal as we had before. It now do something slightly trickier, which is just for aesthetic purposes, take those values of the holes and interpolate them back into the program. And it will do this on text files. So it'll actually load the programs from text files just to make it feel more like a programming language. So if you look, for example, in the sketches directory in my GitHub repository, there is a bunch of files that look like this. That is, that have the slow program and the fast program with holes in it on just two separate lines. And then we can just run example two on some of these things. So I can say sketches s1, for instance. I forgot that this needs a less than. So this will say that if you want x times eight and you want to fit that into an x shift left by something, you can shift that left by three and it interpolates it back into the program. Let's try it a few more. Sketches s2. This is the one we just saw, so I won't even run it. s3. This one's a little bit more interesting. It's here in the examples directory in order to make a point. That point is that so far we've done something that feels like kind of synthesis, sort of, in the sense that all we're doing is synthesizing constants to go into variables. That is, we're asking for actual bit vector values that can go into a given hole. That doesn't really feel like generating a program, though. It's sort of generating a program, but really it's just generating the constants for a program. So how do we get to generating entire expressions? And here's the trick to doing that. We actually don't need to change our synthesis engine at all because it already has support for conditionals for those ternary expressions. So, for example, if we want to do a less constrained version of the sketching where we don't know whether we want to multiply by a variable or by a constant, we can just express that as a condition. That is, think of this entire parenthesized expression as kind of a meta-hole. That is, in the actual system, you would just ask programmers to write down something like x times question mark question mark, and you'd expand that automatically to this Boolean expression. This Boolean expression says, I'm not sure whether I want the variable x, that is a reference to a variable that already exists, or a constant in order to get there. That is, you choose for me by choosing the first hole which kind of expression to use, and then depending on the kind of expression there may be additional holes that you need to fill in to make this work. If you kind of squinted this, we've built a program synthesizer that doesn't just synthesize constants anymore. It synthesizes expressions. It does that by encoding the choice of what expression to use as a variable itself. So I want to demonstrate that this works too, and indeed it does. This has selected that we need to multiply x by x. To make this even more interesting, now we can, I'm taking that idea of like using meta-holes to its logical conclusion. So this is saying that like I want to do x times 9, and I think that I have to do that with a x shifted left by something plus something. So I know that I need to sort of like offset by something else. But in both cases, I'm going to pretend that I don't know what kind of expression at all that I want. Here I'm using a really simple ternary expression that just selects again between variables and constants. So here's the Boolean hole that chooses what to do in each of those locations, and then that can choose whether to use x, that is a reference to an existing variable, or synthesize a constant. And this tells us that we want to shift left by 3 and then add x. That is, it chooses a constant for the first meta-hole and then a variable for the second meta-hole. All of you can see that you can take this to its logical conclusion, and you can make by a clever nesting of integers and comparisons and ternary expressions, you can make this synthesize lots of different expressions. That is, it doesn't just have to choose between variables and constants. It could say, well, I'm not sure if I need a variable or a constant or a shift where one side is either a variable or a constant or a shift. And you can do this to some finite depth and phrase some really complicated synthesis problems. That's a sure-fired way to make Z3 time out, but it shows you that this paradigm, even though it started simple with just synthesizing constants, is enough to ask interesting questions where we're getting Z3 to write real programs for us, given an infinite amount of time. Of course, doing all this ternary operator trick required that funky trick I alluded to earlier when writing the interpreter. That is, this case for the condition. The obvious way to do that in Python would just been to say, okay, so we've evaluated the condition, the true and the false value, those are all constants, so I can just say true if con del's false, which is the moral equivalent of the question mark colon in our source language. This, of course, will not work if true and con and false, those are all symbolic values, any of them might be symbolic values, especially if the con is a symbolic value. The Python if doesn't work that way, it can't be overloaded to do different things, unlike equals and shift left and shift right and all that stuff in Python. So we need to find some other way to generate something, to generate an equivalent Z3 expression. And that is this. This expression happens to work both in Python under normal interpreter mode and also in Z3 operator overloader mode because it doesn't use if, it just uses not equals and times and plus and stuff. So that's how I sort of snuck in a case in the interpreter that worked in the normal interpreter mode and then also happened to work in the symbolic interpreter mode. But once you do that, you kind of have a pretty general program synthesizer. As you make more and more complicated meta-holes, you can make more and more complicated synthesis problems. So your task for this lesson is to start with this paradigm and follow the tutorial, get yourself up and running with a real program synthesizer like this one, and then make it more interesting. It's totally open-ended, you can add whatever feature you want. There is, as usual, no need to spend a huge amount of time on this, but I'm interested in what you come up with to make this language more expressive. I'm also interested in where you start to run to scalability issues. That is, dealing with complex programs and large programs is the hard part of program synthesis, and it's what a lot of the literature is about. Letting these techniques that work on small examples scale up to real complicated programs that programmers actually want to synthesize in the real world. Good luck and have fun synthesizing.
