Title: CS 6120: Lesson 4: Data Flow
Video ID: 1_72tqupsb
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

This lesson is gonna be about global analysis. We're going to see a technique, a general technique for doing global analysis that's based on lots of local analyses. The technique is called data flow. Data flow is a kind of a generic framework that you can fit lots of different analyses into, and then using a single common algorithm, turn that into global analyses that can deal with arbitrary control flow graphs. First, I wanna start out by getting you used to the idea of what a global analysis looks like, one that is actually sensitive to control flow. So let's look at this program. This is a really simple program. I've sort of transcribed it here in purple into make it slightly more readable with an if-else statement. Now imagine that your task is to do some sort of constant propagation on this program. That is, we wanna know what A and C might be, that is like what constants they might be, when we're printing them out at the end, when we finally print out their difference. So the question is, is it possible to replace A with a constant, or is it possible to replace C with a constant? And the point about asking this question is that it is a global property. You can't answer it by just looking at the basic block at the end. You kind of have to look at the entire control flow graph to decide which times you define, that is, which times you assign to A and B, which of those are actually still relevant at the time that you print something involving A and C. 

To answer questions like that, we will have to look at the entire control flow graph, that is, we'll have to think of things in terms of basic blocks and the way they're interconnected. And to make it entirely obvious, I really wanna emphasize that this is not something that can be solved using the same sort of constant propagation LVN techniques that we saw in the last lesson in general for arbitrary control flow graphs. It may be possible to do that for this particular program, but one simple way to break that kind of reasoning, that is just sort of scanning down the list of instructions and updating things one by one, is to realize that this program is equivalent to one where we take this end block and say we like add an explicit return to it and then insert it way up here. And then if we do something that just is sensitive to the ordering of instructions, then this will clearly be wrong for the actual CFG. This program is equivalent, just moving basic blocks around doesn't actually affect the semantics of the program, but reasoning about things in the order of instructions will be completely wrong if we put this block in the wrong place. 

And of course, in general, we need to write global analysis that can deal with any arbitrary control flow graph. That is really imagine any arbitrary topology where the vertices contain any code whatsoever and they can be connected in any control flow structure that is you can imagine any arbitrary edges we're going to have to deal with that structure. And that's what data flow is going to give us a kind of a generic framework for reasoning about. 

Before we jump into the framework, I want to pose one particular global analysis and make it a little bit more formal so we can see how to set it up as a data flow problem. The problem we're going to solve is determining reaching definitions. I've written the formal definition of what a reaching definition is up here on the slide, but it's going to take a few sort of sub definitions in order to get exactly what I mean. Roughly speaking, I mean, we want to know for every instruction in the program, we want to know what other instructions that wrote to variables are still valid at that point. That is, are still the most recent assignment to that variable. To define it however, take a look at these four definitions of funky compiler's terms that we will build up here. The first is a use. An instruction is a use for all of its arguments. So if you say like print A for example, that's a use of the variable A. Conversely, a definition is just an instruction that writes to some variable that we call that a value instruction in Brill in particular. So any instruction that writes to a variable, you can also call that a definition of that variable. An available definition is one that reaches a given program point. So by reaching, I just mean that it is still the most recent definition of that thing. And finally, we'll use the terminology kill. Sorry, but this is just the terminology to say that any definition kills all the currently available definitions for the same variable. That is anything that overwrites a variable kills all the previous definitions at that point. So to return to a definition of reaching, this is just to say that if you have a definition of some variable V, that reaches some other instruction. Remember the definition is an instruction. That reaches some other instruction, call it U. If there exists a path in the CFG from D to U, that is like it's possible for control to go from the definition to the use, where along that path, and you sort of trace all the basic blocks from one path to another, there are no other assignments to that variable V. That is that definition is not killed along the path. 

So the reaching definitions problem, that is the analysis problem we want to solve, can be put this way. For every definition and every use, and remember definitions and uses in braille terminology are instructions. So for every instruction that either uses a variable or writes to a variable, we want to determine whether that definition reaches that use. If you like, you can think of this as a big matrix where you write all the instructions along the X axis and all the instructions along the Y axis. And we want to put in a one or a zero at every location to say if this definition reaches this use. So that's the formal definition of the reaching definitions problem. 

I want you to solve this analysis by hand for the example that we've seen so far. The way this is going to look is that you'll need to for every, like you can come up with names for every definition. So let's call this A1 because it's the first definition of A and this is A2 and this is B1. You can come up with names for every single definition and then look through at all of the uses that is every instruction that uses variables. There is only one use here in the entire program, which actually, sorry, there are two uses. There are these two uses in the final block in the end block here. Decide which definitions according to your naming scheme are reaching this point and reaching this point. Go ahead and stare at this control flow graph for a while, label all the definitions and make a list of the definitions that reach those two uses. 

This was a little bit of a trick question because I forgot that there was another use in this program. There's a third use. Of course, this branch instruction reads from the cond variable. The cond variable is an argument to the function. So we'll also want to incorporate that variable as another definition that's not an instruction, it's a definition that comes from the argument. So we'll want to consider that variable just like any instruction that defines a variable as a definition when we're asking which definitions reach each use. And we'll also, of course, want to write down the uses for that third use. My answer for which definitions are available or reaching, sorry, rather, at the branch instruction here are that, of course, cond one is and a one and b one. Those definitions reach that point. Traversing through the rest of the graph, we now need to answer that question for this assignment to D, which is both, of course, a definition and a use as I've labeled it as D one because it's a definition. But as a use, we can ask which definitions reach there. And the answer is pretty much all of them. That is cond one reaches there. So does a one and b one and a two and b two and b two and c one and c two. All those definitions reach this point. And, of course, for the final point, the set of definitions that reach there are exactly the same with the addition of D one. Great, so you've solved a global analysis problem. So how did you solve this? You used your human brain looking at the program and looking at all the paths through the CFG. That is, presumably, you notice that a one reaches this point because this definition has a path along which a is not killed that reaches this point. And you notice that b has a different path along which it is not killed and therefore it reaches that point. So you kind of had to look at every single definition and try looking for paths through the graph. That was tractable for the small CFG, but you can see how it will quickly get unwieldy and might even be pretty confusing if we end up having cycles in the graph. That is, if we have loops in the control flow. 

To handle general graphs and to do this for arbitrary problems, not just reaching definitions, we have the data flow framework. 

The data flow framework is kind of a recipe. That is, you feed it a few ingredients. That is, you think about your problem that you want to solve as a global analysis. You feed it some information about that problem. And then you ask a data flow solver that is an off the shelf algorithm for solving arbitrary data flow problems to give you back a solution. So the general idea boils down to these four steps. The first step, the first ingredient to solving a data flow problem is to figure out the thing you want to know at every point in the program. But instead of saying that we'll calculate at every single instruction in the data flow setup, we will just try to calculate that thing at the beginning and the ending of every basic block. That is right before the first instruction in every block and right after the last instruction. So we need to figure out what information we're trying to calculate at those points. For the reaching definitions problem, for example, that's like the set of definitions that reach there. So that's like the quantity we want to calculate for those program points. The next step is to write an equation for every single block that relates the state at the beginning to the state at the end. That is, we will do a local analysis on every block. This is kind of the awesome thing about data flow analysis is that in this step, you get to reason completely locally. You can pretend that this is the only block that exists in the entire world and ask questions, for example, about how assuming that we know that some definitions reach the beginning of the block, what definitions must therefore reach the end of the block. And you can temporarily forget about the entire structure of the CFG and just think locally about the one block. Then the rest of the CFG comes in in the next step in the recipe, which is to add equalities that set up equations according to the edges. That is, for example, that somehow the quantity at the end of this basic block must be related to the quantity at the beginning of a basic block that it jumps to. Finally, we will take those systems of equations, that system of equations that we have just made, that is a bunch of equations that relate the beginning to the ending of each basic block and a bunch of equalities that capture the edges in the control flow graph. Those make up a bunch of equalities and we will hand that over the wall to an off-the-shelf solver that will tell us the answer that is the value at every basic block entry and exit. The magic thing about data flow analysis is that you don't have to invent that solving algorithm from scratch every time. I'm gonna show you the pseudocode for a solver for generic data flow problems in just a little bit, but you don't have to make a new solver every single time. You can use a generic solving algorithm for data flow analysis and just provide it with these ingredients to make it do wildly different things each time. 

So to make this concrete, this equation solving view says that we wanna introduce sort of variables that we can write equalities on. So we'll say that there's an in and out variable for every single basic block. That is like the sort of incoming information and the outgoing information for every block. These will be distinct variables. So label this as in for B1 and out for B1 and similarly for every other basic block. The function I mentioned before, that sort of local analysis function for every block, that's sometimes called the transfer function for what it's worth, will relate the in for every block, that is, for example, for B1, to the out for that block. So we'll get a bunch of equalities that way. We will also want to relate the blocks to each other. That is like the exit of one block to the entry of another one. So here's my question for you. I wanna know what to write for this equation in order to capture the edges in the graph. That is, what should I make the variable in left, that is the value for like some arbitrary value if we can imagine as like sets of reaching definitions, but anything we wanna ask about, like what is true about the program at the entry to the left block? What should that be equal to in order to capture the structure of the CFG? I think it should be equal to out B1. That is, whatever was true about the program at the very end of B1 has definitely better also be true at the beginning of the left basic block. That's also true of the right basic block. That is, that should also be equal to, to in right should be equal to out B1. Whatever was true about the program that we're wondering about at the end of B1 should totally still be true at the beginning of the block that it jumps to. So here's a somewhat harder question. What should the value for in end be? That is, what should I set up as the equation that gives the value that is like, what is true about the program at in end? That's a little bit trickier. There's going to need to be some sort of, some sort of way of combining whatever was true at the end of the left and right basic blocks. That is, we can't say that this is, well, whatever is true here is exactly the same as out left. That is like the end of the previous, of the left basic block. It has to be that we need some way of combining those pieces of information. So it's definitely going to be related to out left. That is, in end will have something to do with the out left and out right variables. But this sort of points to one last ingredient that I didn't show you in the recipe, which is we're going to need some way to merge that information. That is, this is sort of the last piece of the puzzle. In order to capture the direct transfers of a control, we can just set things equal to each other. But when a block has more than one predecessor, we're going to need a way to sort of figure out how to mash together the information from both sides. 

So here's kind of a fillable form that I want to fill out for reaching definitions, but you can fill out in a myriad different ways in order to make different global data flow analysis. The first thing you need is an initial value. You need a value for the thing you're trying to compute to sort of kick off the whole thing to provide sort of a seed for the system of equations. We need a value for the reaching definition, say, at the very beginning of the first block, the entry block of the entire function. We've decided that our representation for the values you want to compute are sets of definitions. So this should be a set of definitions. The next thing we need is the transfer function. That is, we need a way to compute the output value, the output set of definitions, given the input set of definitions for every single block. Then finally, the last thing we need is a merge function. That is, we need a way for, whenever you have a block with multiple predecessors that has, it looks in the control flow graph, something like this, we need a way of taking the output values from the predecessor blocks, taking those together, gathering them up, mashing them together somehow, and computing the input value for this basic block. That is, for reaching definitions, these, of course, are all going to be sets of definitions, and we need a way to compute the set of reaching definitions at the entry to a basic block, given that we know the sets of reaching definitions at the end of all the predecessor blocks. So once you do this, that is, once you fill in this form for a given data flow analysis, you're basically done, and we can, in just a moment, see how to solve that system. I want you to pause the video now and try filling in these blanks. Come up with an initial value, a transfer function, and a merge function for reaching definitions. 

Okay, here are my answers. For the entry to the basic block, we will want to use a set representing the arguments to the function. That is, just like we saw for the cond variable in our little example above, we want to sort of seed the system with the set of definitions that have reached the very top of the very first basic block. So that's the set of arguments. Next, we need a transfer function. Because the value we're computing here is a set, a set of definitions, this function is going to look like a operation on sets. That is, this thing is a set, and this thing, the thing we're computing, is a set. And it's also going to have to do, have to ask some questions about the block. So my answer is going to be an equation involving this set in B. Okay, my answer is that if you take the set of definitions that were available at the very beginning of the block and you then remove, this is like a set difference operation, a symmetric difference operation, and you take out everything that was killed by that basic block, then we're almost there. Those things that were reaching this block, but then were killed somewhere in the block, those are no longer reaching the end of the basic block, but some new things are reaching the end of the basic block, which are the definitions of this block. So if we take the union of the definitions of this block and the symmetric difference between the things that were defined at the beginning and the things that were killed by this block, that should be the reaching definitions at the end of the block. It's really common for the values that we're computing in data flow analysis to be sets, and therefore it's really common for transfer functions to look like a bunch of operations on sets. That is to take the input set and take local analyses about the blocks that compute sets, and then do setty operations on them, like union and symmetric difference and stuff, to compute the value for the output. Okay, so finally, we need a merge function. That is, we need to say, okay, given that I have a basic block, I wanna know how to compute the reaching definitions at the top, given that I have a bunch of sets of reaching definitions for my predecessors, the ends of my predecessors. The operation, the merge function for reaching definitions is just union, and I'm writing it really big because it's like a big union over all the predecessors, all the end variables for the predecessors to this block. If we have that, that is a complete definition of the reaching definitions problem, and all we need to do is solve this problem. 

So the next step is going to be looking at a generic algorithm for solving data flow analyses, given these ingredients that we've just given for reaching definitions. This is the classic work list algorithm for solving data flow problems. One thing that I think is remarkable about this algorithm is that it's so short and it's so easy to understand. It's remarkable that it works at all and that it works for any arbitrary data flow problem that satisfies some constraints. I think it's truly remarkable. So as I showed above, there's a few things you need to provide to this algorithm. You need to provide initial value and functions that we will here call merge and transfer. The way the algorithm works is it first needs to initialize things. Here, I'm sort of representing those in and out variables as maps that is like for every basic block, including the entry block. We will have an in variable and an in. 

The work list represents the blocks that still need to be processed. That is that they have preliminary values for their input and output variables, but still need updating. And eventually, this is going to start out as all the blocks because we haven't really analyzed anything. And eventually, the thing will terminate when we have no more blocks to process. So the way that the classic work list algorithm works is that you can pick any block at all from the work list. It doesn't actually matter what the order is. This is another remarkable property of this algorithm, that it remains stable, that is the solving remains stable regardless of the order that you pick. You can just take any arbitrary block that hasn't been finished. And what you do is that you update its in and out variables. You update its in variables by running the merge function. So you get the out variable for every predecessor. And to remind you what a predecessor looks like, we're in a control flow graph. This is us, the basic block in question. Call that B. And then everything up here is a predecessor and everything down here is a successor of B. So if we take the out variable for every predecessor and we call the merge function on it for reaching definitions, again, that's like the big union operator, that gives us the in value for this block. Then, now that we have an input value, we can just call the transfer function to do the local analysis on this block and compute the out block. Then finally, all we need to do is maintain the work list. And this just says that if we change anything about out B, that is if that update sets a new value for out B that wasn't the old value about out B, we just have to tell the algorithm that we now need to pay attention to the successors again. That is those successors are going to have to look at our output value to compute their input value again. So every step in this algorithm is easy to understand. That is that we need to sort of merge our inputs, do our transfer and then ask for our successors to run. What I think is surprising that is true that you can prove about this is that like given a few constraints that this is guaranteed to converge. That is it runs in a finite amount of time and gives you the correct answer. That is it gives you values for in and out that satisfy the system of equations defined by your data flow problem. There's one extra detail about the work list algorithm and about data flow problems in general that I haven't revealed yet, which is that there are two different flavors. There is forward algorithms and backward algorithms. The reaching definitions problem is a forward data flow analysis problem. That means that it works by like having an initial value for the entry block and then traversing from predecessors to successors that is passing information downward along the data flow graph. It's also possible to have backwards data flow analysis where you have an initial value for the end of the exit block and you propagate information backward along the edges in the graph. This algorithm generalizes really nicely to backward problems. That is all you have to do is kind of like flip the in and out direction and you have to flip the predecessors and successors in this algorithm. And if you do that, you can do other analyses that we'll see in a little while that require a different kind of analysis where like information comes from the end and goes to the beginning. 

One last really surprising thing about solvers for data flow analysis. They work pretty much automatically if your program has cycles. That is we have only really been considering examples where the CFG is kind of this feed forward graph that doesn't have any loops in it. And I think it's remarkable that the algorithm still converges and still gives you the right answer even if you have loops. And this is the really nice thing. If you had to reinvent analyses for loops every single time, you would quickly lose patience with compilers. So the data flow solver algorithms like the work this algorithm provide a really nice way to deal with arbitrary graphs including ones with cycles like this one. If you calculate the reaching definitions for this program with that has an actual loop in it, it will just work and it will give you the answer that you expect. That is it will satisfy the equalities in your systems of equations, which is super cool. 

I wanna briefly touch on the requirements for what makes this work. Cause you can't just give like any arbitrary, you probably wouldn't wanna like feed in a merge function for example, that like flips a coin and then just decides whether to include reaching definitions or not. There are requirements in order to make the data flow analysis algorithm converge and give you the right answer. There's really deep theory about what makes data flow analysis work. And I don't wanna go off into the theory. You can read about that in the links for today's lesson if you're curious. But I do wanna give you kind of an idea of what is a sufficient condition for a data flow analysis to be well-formed and therefore for the algorithm to successfully conclude things about it. The first is, and this is kind of the big one that you have to pay attention to is monotonicity. That is like in general, the values that you're computing through the solving of the Workless algorithm, they kind of have to only go in one direction for some definition of directions. That is when we gather more information and this is most concrete if you are computing sets, we have to be adding things to the sets. So you have to be able to define some sort of an order on the values you're computing and you ensure that every time the Workless algorithm runs, things are only ever moving in that order. Maybe you can see how this in general ensures that the algorithm will eventually terminate. That is that if you have a order that can eventually end in one way or another, then by only moving in one direction, then you ensure convergence. That's kind of the proof of termination for this algorithm. 

So for example, you can imagine the order for sets. It makes sense to use the subset order. So if we are thinking about sets of variables as in this example, I'm showing a partial order that's the subset relation on sets of A, B, and C. And the nice thing about this order is that it has a top element and a bottom element. That is it has the empty set and then the finite set of all the variables that are being computed. Which means if we only ever move one direction in this and it doesn't matter which direction in this one because there's a top element and a bottom element, if we only ever move one direction in this relation, then we are guaranteed to eventually converge. That is like someday we'll either, if we're going in the upward direction, we'll eventually get to the empty set and then we'll know that the work of this algorithm will definitely terminate or we'll eventually get saturated and get to the universe set, the finite set of all the variables in the program, for example. And then we'll also know that it terminates. 

So if it helps you want to, if you wanna like prove to yourself that your data flow analysis like fits this constraint, you can think of defining a partial order on the values that are being computed. So for example, if we're doing something with sets, then that partial order, you can use the superset relation, for instance. And you need to think of your merge function. You ensure that your merge function, whatever it is, is the meat that is the greatest lower bound on that partial order. So for example, for this partial order, the meat is the union operator. So in this sense, by like picking the partial order, you kind of fill out the entire recipe for doing data flow. The initial value has to be the top value, here the empty set, and then your transfer function has to be monotonic with respect to the order. By which I mean that if you have an ordering between X and Y, then applying the transfer function to F to X and applying the transfer function to Y should preserve that ordering. So X ordered with respect to Y implies that F of X is ordered with respect to F of Y. If you do that, then you have satisfied the requirements of data flow and you're guaranteed to get a correct answer and for the algorithm to terminate and give you that correct answer. 

It can be useful to think about what even defines a correct solution to a data flow problem. That is, what is a correct answer for a system of data flow equations? The classic answer to this is to define it as the meet overall path solution. So imagine this sort of idealized data flow graph. There's a, this is B1, we will think of as the entry block. So this is a path from the entry block to a given node we, that we're considering that the, there are lots of possible paths potentially through other nodes not shown here from the entry block to the given block. We will say that a correct solution is if you take, if you sort of chain the transfer function across the, across all the blocks along a path from the entry to your node and then you take all of those chains and you meet, you take the meet, that is the merge function across all of those things. Then you get the correct answer for the data flow analysis. So to write it out in symbols, we can say that like out for a given block, call it BN, that is like the out variable for that thing is a, the big meet, that is like take the, take the merge function and apply it to all the paths from the entry block to BN and call that B1. Remember that's the entry block and then a bunch of stuff in the middle and eventually BN and then take the, then we will compute the value going across a given path. So we will, this will look like a bunch of applications of the transfer functions for all of the blocks. Eventually applied to the top value for the partial order. So first we'll have to apply B1 and then we'll have to apply F for every block along the chain and eventually BN minus one and finally BN and applying the transfer function along the entire chain and then taking the meet of that thing, that sort of defines the correct solution. Finding all the paths is of course gonna be super, super slow, which is why we like the work list algorithm. And it's remarkable that that algorithm, which is efficient is guaranteed to find the same solution as this kind of like exhaustive, look at all the paths thing. And just to be clear, it's not even clear what, how you would do it in a track in a reasonable way in the presence of a graph with cycles. That is like, if you think your naive algorithm is going to be like enumerate all the paths from the entry block to my block in question and then compute something for every single path, that ain't gonna work if your graph has cycles because enumerate all the paths will never finish. There are an infinite number of paths in a directed graph with cycles, of course. 

So the algorithm, the argument for the correctness of data flow algorithms that is like for the work list algorithm for solving a data flow problem relies on the party properties of the partial order that's sort of underpinning your data flow problem. I'm not gonna talk about like that exact proof, but if you're super curious, there are links that you can follow associated with this lesson. 

The final thing I wanna do in this lesson is take this framework that we've learned about and instantiate it. Think about how to instantiate it for lots of different global analysis problems. So I've made a big table here that lists and you can see these analyses in the notes for this lesson as well. It lists a bunch of global analysis that you can solve with a data flow analysis problem. And the idea is that you can do this by, you can solve all of these problems just by filling out the cells in this table. That is you just have to provide the ingredients, the domain that is like the types of things that you're calculating, the direction forward or backward, the merge function and the transfer function. I'm gonna explain to you really briefly what all these things are and then it's gonna be your task now to think about how to fill in the cells of the table in order to come up with a setup for a data flow analysis that solves this problem. We've already talked about reaching definitions, so I won't talk about that one. Live variables are the set of all the variables that have been written to and are going to be read or might be read sometime in the future. That is it's not just the variables that are defined at a given point, it's the ones that are still necessary. You can see how this might be useful in eliminating some dead code and taking your dead code elimination to kind of a data flowy place. Constant propagation is something that we did locally using LVM, but constant propagation on a data flow graph needs some way to understand like at every point in the program whether a variable is guaranteed to be a constant and so you can replace that variable with a constant. Available expressions asks which expressions have been computed before, expressions in terms of variables. And this of course is useful in doing common sub-expression elimination on an entire control flow graph. Then initialized variables I included, it's not about optimization. Initialized variables, you know in Java how it complains at you if you define a variable, if you say like string s and then later on you try to say like s plus hello or something, it will complain about you at the point where you use a variable when it's not defined. This of course is a flow sensitive property, it has to do with the control flow graph. For example, you can do all sorts of like loops and ifs and stuff assigning to variables at different points and that will like, that affects whether you should get an error when you try to read from a variable that's uninitialized. So the initialized variables data flow problem answers that sort of thing. Interval analysis is an interesting one. It's about numerical problems. So when you actually care about like the floating point or integer value of a variable and it asks what is the interval that is like say like from five to 42, for example, that is the range of values that that variable can take on. For example, if you end up with this range and eventually you have like something that says like if X is less than 45, then you can simplify this to true because you know that you don't know exactly what the variable is but you do know that it's less than 45. All of these things can be solved with suitable definitions of the domain, the direction, the merge function and the transfer function. I want you to pick just one of these analyses and think through how to fill in the columns. That is like maybe you wanna take constant propagation. Think of, I've given you kind of the domain that is like the thing that we're calculating. That's pretty easy. Think about whether you wanna do that forward or backward that is predecessor, successor or the other way around and come up with a merge function and a transfer function. Do that now and then of course offline, you are welcome to in your implementation, play with as many of these things as you like by plugging them into a data flow framework. 

I'm not gonna tell you all the answers. You can work these out and even try them out on real code in your implementation. I do however wanna give you one example of a backward analysis. We've so far seen fully worked through a forward analysis and reaching definitions. Let's think about live variables. And remember what we're trying to do is calculate the set of variables that have been defined and are going to be used at some point in the future that is later in the control flow graph. So I've told you that some of the ingredients are that these are gonna be sets of variables. Obviously, the domain is sets of variables. The direction will be backward and the merge function is going to use union. Beyond that, we just need to define the transfer function. And here's my idea. We will start, we need to define this function and use a little bit more room here. We need to define this function on and this goes backward this time. So instead of computing the out value based on the in value, we will compute the in value based on the out value. So for a given basic block, we have an output set of live variables and we need to compute the input set of live variables. That is the ones that are live at the beginning of the block. So that's gonna start with those things that are live at the end. And like before, this is gonna have to do with set operations. So we're gonna take the symmetric difference to take the things that were live at the end and remove variables that were killed during this basic block that is like assigned to. So those definitions that were, that you can just write, kill B, those are not live at the beginning of the basic block. So it's all the things that were live at the end except for those ones that we killed somewhere in the middle of the basic block. And then also there are the uses, that is the things that are defined before they're used somewhere in this basic block. And we'll say that those things are now live. That is, if you refer to X, for example, somewhere in the basic block and that wasn't live before, well, it's live now at the top of the basic block. So this data flow equation, this transfer function for live variables coupled with the rest of the ingredients gives you a global analysis that tells you this very cool information just by plugging it into the existing algorithm. I encourage you to do this for all of them. Take as much time as you want, of course, and just look through all these analyses and try to think through how you would set them up as data flow problems, thinking up the direction and the merge operator and the transfer function. It can be great fun.
