Title: Compiler Design Module 86 : Register Spilling
Video ID: eU0YUZo6k6c
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

So, last time we talked about how we could do resistor allocation by creating a many-to-one mapping from temporaries to resistors and the idea was that if a pair of temporaries is simultaneously lying at some program location, then they cannot be assigned the same resistor. But that may not always be possible, so let's say my machine has only 8 resistors and I have let's say 20 temporaries, then it may not be possible to find such a many-to-one mapping where such a property is satisfied, which is that if two temporaries are simultaneously lying, then they are mapped to different resistors. Now, if that is the case, then we need to spill some of the temporaries to memory and that is called resistor spilling and that would be our topic of discussion today. So, the question is what if the graph cannot be colored with the available number of colors or resistors, right? For example, in the example that we have been discussing, let's assume that the machine had only 3 resistors while the rig, the resistor interference graph was 4 colorable, so it was 4 colorable but not 3 colorable, so it's possible to color that rig with 4 colors but it is not possible to color that rig with 3 colors, but our machine has only 3 resistors. So what is the answer? Well, we'll have to choose some temporary that we would have to spill to memory. Now, I would like to point out here that here we are assuming that we are finding whether the rig is 4 colorable or not using a full algorithm with optimal solution and things like that. But as I pointed out last time, graph coloring is actually an NP-hard problem and so finding the optimal or precise solution, whether something is 4 colorable or not, whether something is 3 colorable or not may not always be feasible. In fact, we are usually using heuristics to figure out whether I can color it in 3 colors or 4 colors or not and if the heuristic fails, even then we can say, okay, it's not colorable. So maybe the graph was 3 colorable but our heuristic was not able to find a coloring which has only 3 colors, in which case also we are going to do spilling, alright? It may be suboptimal but then there's a trade-off between how long the algorithm runs, which means how long the compiler runs and what is the quality of code that is generated. So in any case, if whatever algorithm we are using is not able to color the graph with the number of registers which are equal to the number of machine registers, that many colors, then we are going to have to spill some temporary. And so we need to choose a temporary that would be spilled to memory and how will this work? 

So this is the topic of discussion today and we are going to pick a node in the graph and recall that a node in the register interference graph is nothing but a temporary register. So pick a node in the graph as a candidate for spilling. This temporary will live in memory. So we are going to make sure that this temporary will live in memory from here on and we remove the pig node and all its incident edges from the rig, alright? So we basically say that, okay, this temporary is going to live in the memory. So we remove all the incident edges in the rig to that node. Now there's slight complexity here which I'm going to discuss here. Can we remove all the edges or do we need to be more careful when I'm going to discuss the code generation strategy for spilling, this will become clearer. Basically, the idea is when we remove the pig node and at least some of its incident edges, if not all, we are going to make the rig sparser, alright? We are going to reduce the number of edges in the rig and also the number of nodes in the rig. And so when that happens, then the rig will now start becoming colorable with less number of colors, hopefully, right? And so we're going to keep doing this until the rig actually becomes K-colorable. And the way our algorithm is going to work, there's a guarantee that eventually, for some value, if the K is greater than equal to, let's say, at least one, then eventually, of course, I could spill everything to memory. And of course, I'm going to get a one-colorable graph at the very end because it's going to be only one node. So in general, K is going to be the number of machine registers, say 8, 16, 32, or something like that. And so I'm going to keep doing this until my graph becomes K-colorable. And when it becomes K-colorable, then I would have reached a solution. But hold on, we're going to discuss some more interesting twists here. So firstly, the question is, what node to pick, right? I mean, that is itself a difficult question. Picking one node may be better than picking another node. And a question that comes to mind is, what should be the criteria for picking a node, all right? So let's first figure out what the criteria is. 

And the answer is, first of all, we're going to use heuristics to try to recover from, we're going to pick something based on some criteria. And if that node choice was actually a bad choice, maybe, then you're going to use heuristics to try to recover from that bad choice, all right? So that's going to be our guiding principle, all right? So firstly, let's discuss what should be our example criteria to pick a node, all right? So I should say example criteria, all right? Not heuristics, but example criteria. And these are just heuristic criteria, so that's why heuristics is a good word. But what should be the example criteria? Well, one idea would be, let's pick the node with the maximum degree in the rig, right? What's the idea? Well, if I pick the node which has the maximum degree, by degree, I mean number of incident edges to that particular node. So if I pick a node which has the maximum number of incident edges to that node, then removing it is making the graph most sparse, right? Removing that node is going to remove most number of edges from the graph, and so that's going to give me the highest likelihood of making the graph color. Well, while this approach is good for the algorithm that just pick up the node which basically has the maximum number of incident edges, it makes the algorithm faster, converges faster because you're kind of removing most number of edges every step. It's not clear that it's the best possible choice because maybe that particular temporary that represents that node was in the hot region of the code. And now if you're picking a node, picking that temporary, you're allocating it to memory, and the cost in terms of runtime for the generated code would be higher than if you had picked something else. So here are some other ideas. Pick the temporary whose live range is minimum, all right? So what is the live range? Live range is the size of the code, static size of the code during which that particular temporary is live. So recall that we talked about liveness and we said that at this program point temporary A is live, at this program point temporary B is live, and C is live and so on, right? So if I count all the program points at which B is live, let's say, so that would be the live range of B. Similarly, if I count all the program points at which A is live, that would be the live range of A. And one idea is that you pick that temporary whose live range is the smallest. So if A is being used only in, let's say, three or four program points, it's being live at only three or four program points, then if I pick that, then I'm going to spill it to memory for those three or four program points. But for other program points, it won't even matter. And the idea again here is that you want to reduce the effect, the downside of spilling. Recall that if you spill to memory, then you're going to have to do memory accesses and they're going to be more expensive. And so you want to make sure that these expensive accesses are confined to a small part of your code. And so this heuristic of picking a temporary whose live range is minimum is going to ensure that you are spilling those registers whose, you know, where the spill effect is going, the performance effects of the spilling are going to be confined to a small region of the code. But then, you know, just because a region of code, statically speaking, is small, doesn't mean that it is not very consequential to performance. For example, if I have an inner loop in my program and that's a small body of the inner loop in which, let's say, register B is live, but that inner loop is going to be executing, let's say, 99% of the time. So even though it's a small static region of the code, it's being executed 99% of the time. And so that's a bad candidate for spilling. And so even this heuristic doesn't seem very satisfactory. Here's a third heuristic which says, you know, spill that temporary, which is used only in cold code regions, right? So basically you have some way of determining what are the cold regions of the code and what are the hot regions of the code. For example, any code that is executing only in the initialization step, maybe, you know, the first instruction of the main function or the last instruction of the exit, place where the exit is called. These are cold regions of the code. You know that this is only going to execute once and then it's going to exit or it's going to be only execute once at entry. But then code that is living in loops and then you can do some kind of graph analysis and you're going to talk about some kinds of ways to figure out, you know, what are loops what are parts of loops and not parts of loops later on. But if you can figure out that this is a loop and this particular instruction lives inside the loop, then you know that this instruction is hotter than the instruction that was present just at the entry of the program, right? Because the entry of the program is going to be executed only once in the entire lifetime of an execution. Whereas the instruction that's present inside a loop will probably, could potentially execute multiple times, even potentially thousands, millions or even billions of times. And so, you know, you use heuristics, you use estimates to identify what is cold code and what is hot code. And then the registers which are being used only in the cold regions of the code, you select them for spilling. Now this is a good idea in general, but then as I said, determining what is hot and what is cold just by statically looking at the program may not always be possible. And sometimes your guesses about what is hot and what is cold could be wrong, in which case you would be making wrong choices. So often what happens is that the second and the third, a combination of the second and the third criteria is used. So you pick nodes which are live only in cold regions and whose live ranges are relatively smaller. And some kind of combination of these two is a good idea and those nodes are the nodes that you're going to pick. I mean, our algorithm should be independent of what node we pick, right? So our algorithm that is going to do this register spilling and then code generation should be independent of what the criteria was or what was the actual node that was selected by the criteria. And so, we already discussed what are the three different ideas that come to mind and kind of discussed what are the relative merits and demerits of each of those ideas. And in practice, it's the live range or coldness of a region at which the register being discussed is live. Those are the areas where we were going to try to spill. I would like to point out here that we are, once again, we are assuming that either a register is completely spilled to memory throughout the duration of the program or the register is retained in a machine register, the temporary register is retained in a machine register throughout the duration of the program. Later on, we are also going to discuss schemes where you can kind of divide the program into segments and say that, okay, in this segment, this particular temporary is going to live in memory and in this segment, it is going to live in registers. So we're going to just kind of approach the solution in a step-by-step manner. All right, so which node to pick? We have these example criteria. And then once we know what node to pick, if we pick the wrong node in the sense that it was, maybe I could have picked something else and still gotten better coloring. So the idea is also the node that I pick should be in a path such that I can have a coloring of the graph with the minimum number of spillings. That's also a criterion, right? That I don't want to spill 10 nodes. Probably if I can get away by just spilling five nodes, that's great, right? So I would like to spill minimum number of nodes. But notice that our criteria for selecting the node to spill is kind of different from what is the optimal solution in terms of the smallest number of nodes to spill because we're also worried about whether it's being used in cold regions, hot regions, and stuff like that, whereas the rig doesn't care about cold or hot or things like that. So if it turns out that I can actually color it back, then I'm going to use heuristics to again try to recover from a bad choice of the picked node. And I'm going to show that in my next slide. 

And so the solution here is called optimistic coloring. So we pick a node to spill, say the node I picked was N, and remove it from the rig, including the incident edges, all right? So this is something that we have discussed already. Then we color the remaining graph with K colors, because K is the number of machine registers. So we try to color the remaining graph with K colors. And it's possible that it's still not possible to color the remaining graph with K colors, in which case we could spill more nodes until it is possible to color it with K nodes. So it's a recursive algorithm. I pick a node, then I basically say, okay, now color the rest of the graph with K colors. Again, maybe it's not colorable, in which case I'm allowed to spill. But when I return from that solution, I would have a K colorable graph with some potential spillings. Now, after the remaining graph is colored, so this is the inductive step, right? So we are basically approaching it as an induction. We removed some node, we made the graph shorter, then we solved that shorter graph, smaller graph. And then once it is solved, then we try to add this node back in. So after the remaining graph is colored, try adding N back into the graph. So notice that I haven't really committed that I'm going to spill N, I just removed it. And now once the rest of the graph has been colored, then I try to add it back. And if it is possible to find the color for N, such that the coloring principle is followed, which means even if I add N and its incident edges, then the graph still remains K colorable, right? So it's possible to find a color for N such that all the neighbors of N are colored with a different color from the color of N. If we can do that, then that's great. And we didn't have to spill N, right? So even though we kind of made a choice for N, after we kind of went and did the coloring of the rest of the graph, when we came back, we kind of tried to add N back in, we were able to add N, which means we didn't actually have to spill N at all. It was just that we made a choice and then we kind of said, okay, but that's not, it wasn't really a good choice to spill, let's add it back, because I can now see that it's being added back. Now I should point out these are all heuristics. I mean, these are not optimal algorithms to do this, but this is a very efficient algorithm and actually works very well in practice. So I'm going to show you an example. 

So let's say this is the rig that we actually had for our example from our previous module. There are, let's say, six temporaries. And let's say my machine has three registers. So I need a three color. As we discussed last time, this graph is not three colorable. It is four colorable, but it is not three colorable. So what do I do? I need to pick a node to spill. 

So let's say I pick the node A. Now, once again, this node, the choice of node is kind of coming from some other criteria that is not even captured in the rig. And so let's say maybe A was being appearing in colder regions of the code or whatever. And so we decided that we pick A. So what do we do? We remove A and we remove all the incident edges of A. Now we have this remaining graph here. And we try to color it. Now it turns out that even this graph is not three colorable. So we need to, again, spill something. And what do we pick to spill? 

Well, let's say that we pick F to spill. So now we pick F to spill. And now we are left with this graph of B, E, C, and D because we removed F and we removed all the incident edges of F. Now, once we have this, then we can now color these, the nodes of this graph. Can we find a three coloring for this graph? The answer is yes. And here is the coloring. So let's say my colors are green, blue, and purple. So I just need to ensure that B and D are colored with the same color in this example, purple. And then C and E can be colored with the other two colors. And so this is a solution. And now my graph is three colorable. Now, once I'm done with this, I want to be optimistic. So that's why it's called optimistic coloring. I try to add the nodes that I had picked in the reverse order back to the graph. 

So for example, I had picked F, so let's try to add F back to the graph. And let's try adding F. But if I add F, then the problem is I cannot find a color for F such that the coloring principle is followed. Because if I pick purple, but there is an incident edge with a purple node, if I pick blue, there's an incident edge with a blue node, if I pick green, there's an incident edge with a green node. So I cannot find a color for F. So basically that means now we have kind of committed that F needs to be spilled. All right, so we are going to spill F and we're going to see later on how we're going to generate the code for spilling F. 

But then we try to add A back. So we didn't add F back because if I add F back, then we don't have the coloring principle followed. But then if I try to add A back, now recall that A basically had two edges, one was going to F and the other was going to C. F is no longer present, so now the only incident edge to A is C. And now it is possible to find a color for A. And for example, I could either use the purple color for A or the green color for A. So let's say I chose the green color for A and I can find a color for A, which means now I don't need to spill A. So, you know, basically, although we picked two nodes in this example, eventually our solution basically had to spill only one node and that's why it's called optimistic coloring because, you know, while we kind of pick things heuristically, we also optimistically try to see whether we can add them back in so that our solution is still valid. So final solution, we need to spill F and we do not need to spill A or any other node. Now the question is how to spill F and how to do the code generation for a spill temporary register. So here's the question, how to spill? 

Well, the idea is we're going to allocate a memory location for F, typically in the current activation record or also called the stack frame, and call its address FA, right? So just like we discussed when we were talking about code generation, we discussed how we need to create stack slots or temporary spaces in the activation record, we can create a temporary space for F in this case, right? And let's call its address be FA. And this FA could be, you know, stack pointer relative or something like that. It doesn't really matter. It doesn't need to be an absolute address. And then before each operation that reads F, we are going to say F equals load FA and then after each operation that writes F, we are going to insert store F to FA, right? So everything that reads, we are just going to, before that we're going to say, okay, let's load it in, you know, because it's in memory, we need to load it into some temporary register and then operate on it. And then once we are done, we can kind of, you know, if you want to write something, then if we don't write to the temporary register, let's say F, then we don't really care because already the FA is the right value and so we can just throw the temporary register value. We don't really care. But if there is an operation that writes to F in the original IR, then we are going to add another instruction later on. It's going to say store F comma FA, which means just store the result, the return result back to the address. So basically anytime there's a read, before that put a load, anytime there's a write, after that put a store to FA, which is the address of A. And I'm assuming here that there is a temporary register available, which is F, and I can find, maybe I can reserve one register just for this business or there are other ways to do it. For example, we may not remove all the edges in the rig. You know, we can kind of couple these solutions together and so on. But for simplicity, let's assume that there is an extra register available for this temporary, to hold this temporary value for the duration of the operation on F. We can even, you know, we can at will keep storing it back to, so whenever we feel that, you know, I need another temporary, I can just store it back to FA and things like that. So it, you know, one can always find ways to do this. Of course, you know, there are no optimality guarantees there. We're just using heuristics to find a reasonable solution. Optimal solutions are going to be too expensive to compute here. Also rename each use of F to F1, F2, F3, all right? So in this new program, we're going to have this temporary register, let's call it F. And now when we actually going to do the live, live-ness analysis, then F is going to appear in many places because anywhere FA is being loaded from, we're going to say F and then anywhere which F is going to be stored, write it into, then we're going to say F again because then we're going to write it back to FA. Now, now that, let's say I want to do more register allocation or more analysis on the new code in which I've spilled F, then it will appear like F is appearing in many places. But actually, these are all different Fs because every time I load, I'm actually getting a new value, right? So it's a good idea to also rename each use of F to a separate temporary name, for example, F1, F2, F3, and so on, so that it's very clear that these Fs are completely different and independent. And so, if I now draw a register interference graph, each of these F1, F2, F3 are going to appear as different nodes. And so we are guaranteed that the new graph will be sparser than the original graph. And it would be an easier, much easier problem to solve than if I didn't have different versions of F present in my register interference graph. 

Okay, so what is the effect of spilling on rig? Well, because F has been broken into several different variables with short live ranges, the rig becomes sparser and easier to color. And that's basically, you know, what we have achieved using the optimistic coloring algorithm. So once again, let me summarize. We first form a register interference graph based on likeness information. We try to color it with K colors. If we can color it, we are done. If we cannot color it, we iteratively pick some node to spill and we try to color the remaining graph and we keep doing this. At the end, we are able to find a rig that is colorable, K colorable. Now, all the nodes that we have picked, we kind of try to add them one by one back in. If we are able to add them, we do add them. If we are not able to add them, we keep them with us. And those, in the end, the temporary registers that we are left with, they are the ones that need to be spilt. This whole algorithm is called the optimistic coloring algorithm because we are optimistically trying to add them back in when we are done with the coloring. So that's why it's called optimistic coloring. Now, all the registers that need to be spilt, we basically, anywhere they are being read, we basically add, so add a load instruction before the read and anytime they're being written, we add a store instruction after the write. Also, when we load, we don't load to the same register. In fact, we rename it to new temporary registers, which are very short live ranges because they're only going to be used for that instruction that's going to read it. And similarly, that instruction that's going to write it. And so because of those short ranges, the resulting rig has become much sparser. And that's why it is now still K colorable, whereas earlier it was not K colorable. One way to do this is, for example, having a dedicated register just for doing the loading and storing for the spilt registers so that that register will not interfere with all the other registers in my program.
