Title: Compiler Design Module 77 : Dataflow Analysis Algorithm
Video ID: qDxLWXHDvBY
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

So now we need to discuss how we could implement a data flow analysis to identify the abstract values of interest. So for example, last time we discussed how constant propagation values, abstract values would capture the behavior of the program at a programmable program point. Recall that we discussed three different types of values. One is top, one is bottom, and one is a constant C for some constant C. And the question is, how do I identify what the value should be at every program point? And recall that we are only looking at one particular variable X for now, but very later we're going to generalize it for all possible variables. So the insight is that the data flow analysis of a complex and large program can be expressed as a combination of simple rules relating the change in information between adjacent statements. So we're going to just see, okay, what is the value just before me? And then I'm going to look at what is the current statement. And then based on that, I'm going to have a rule about what should be the value after the statement. So I look at the value before the statement. I look at the statement itself. And then from that, I basically form a rule which says, oh, in this situation, the value after the statement should be this. And after I form these rules, I can just keep applying these rules across the program. And that way I can start computing values across the entire program. So that's basically the idea and the insight here. And so one way to think about it is that you're pushing or transferring the information from one statement to the other. And you keep doing this. It's almost like program execution. Even execution, you could have a large program, but the transfer control is just transferring from one program point to the other. You can think of data flow analysis as also an execution over the program, just that this time, the values are not concrete values, just as they are in the case of an execution, executing program. Here, the values are abstract values, for example, top, bottom, and C. So we're going to see that in more detail and maybe it'll become clearer. 

All right. So what should be this function for constant information? So we know that the values are top, bottom, and constant. But then let's define a function that basically evaluates to one of these values. And that function is, let's call that capital C. It takes a variable X, the variable X for which we are interested in computing these values, these abstract values. The statement S in the program, which defines the program point. And it's not enough to just say statement S, you have to also say whether it's the input of the statement or output of the statement, just before the statement or just after the statement. So in and out, in represents just before the statement and out represents just after the statement. So we define the function CXS in or out, and CXS in is the value of X before S, the abstract value of X. And CXS out is the value of X just after S. And recall that the abstract values belong to either top, constant, or bottom. All right. So we're going to use this function, and we're going to define this function for every X and for every S. All right. So that's the idea. For now, we're just going to concentrate on one single X. And just so basically in that case, we are defining this function for every S. All right. And both in and out for that particular S. 

So we're going to do this using the notion of a transfer function. Recall that we said that data flow analysis involves pushing or transferring information from one statement to the other. And so we're going to define how this information is going to get transformed as it kind of gets transferred from one statement to the other. And this function that's going to define this change is going to be called transfer function. The transfer function transfers information from one statement to another. All right. So for example, if I have a point in my program where there is a statement S3 that has two incoming edges to it from statements S1 and S2, then I'm going to say, okay, then I'm going to ask the question, what does C evaluate to at the out of S1? All right. So out of S1 is this point. So what is the value here? Then what is the value of C at out of S2? And that is the value at this point. And based on that, I'm going to find what is the value of C at in of S3. All right. Which is the value at this point. So my rules are going to look like the following, that if the value at out of S1 is V1 and out of S2 is V2, then the value of in of S3 is going to be V3. And the function is going to specify how V3 is going to relate to V1 and V2. And that relation may also depend on different things. For example, how many edges are coming in or what is the nature of S1, S2, or what is the nature of property being computed? In this case, the property we've been computing is the constant information. And that's why I'm calling it a capital C function. Similarly, there would be another type of transfer, which is across a statement. Notice that this was just transfer from out of one statement to the end of the other statement. And this case was only interesting because there were two outs that were meeting into the same in. Within a basic block, it would be the same thing. Whatever is the out of one statement is actually going to be the end of the other statement because there's only one option. But in this particular case here, there's actually two things that are coming in, flowing in. And so you want to basically specify in a transfer function, how these two values are going to be combined to form a single value, which is the value at in of S3. Now, the other component of the transfer function is, how does the value flow across a statement? So if the value at the end of S, for some statement S, is V, then what should be the value of that function, of that C function at the out of S? So if this is V, then what is the output of that value? So notice that this is very similar to execution because even in execution, you say, oh, if input is 10 and statement is plus one, is going to do X plus one, then output is 11. Just that now the input is not a concrete value like 10, it's just an abstract value, which is either top, bottom, or a constant C. And so just that the environment of the execution has changed and this environment basically lets us implement a data flow analysis. 

So transfer function for global constant propagation, we will define the function using case analysis. So we're going to consider all possible cases. So for example, we will say, oh, if S is this, if S looks like this, and the input value is this, then the output value is going to be that. And there are not that many cases. So the good thing about using abstract values and not concrete values is that there is only a limited number of values. For example, there's only three values, three different values. Actually, there are actually infinite number of values because the constant C can be any possible constant. It could be one, two, three, four, whatever. Not infinite, but large number of values depending on whatever is the range that X can take. But basically, as we're going to show later, that it's going to be only taking three different unique values at any point in my execution of the data flow analysis, because once it has taken, let's say three, it cannot now take four. It can only take some other value, let's say bottom or something like that. So we're going to discuss that later. But the point is that there are a few number of values. In this case, only three different types of values. And so because of that, the execution is possible to define the transfer function in a small way and just say that, okay, this is what the transfer function looks like and do all the possible case analysis for the small number of different values that exist. So in this case, for example, you say if C, X, P out is bottom. So I'm just taking examples of what the rules are going to look like. So I'm saying that, okay, if it is true that, so if there is a predecessor P and then it has multiple successors, let's say S1 and S2, then this rule is saying that if the value here is bottom, then the value at the top, at the beginning of S1 and S2 is also going to be bottom. That's what the first example rule is saying. So typically these rules will make intuitive sense. And so you won't have to remember them, but it's important to list them out to make sure that the function is defined. Similarly, there is another rule. So you say if X in is C and S does not modify X, then S C X S out is equal to C. So this is basically saying that, let's say if I have a statement S and at the in point, the value is small c, then the out point and S does not modify X, then the out point, the value is still going to be C. And this also makes intuitive sense. 

So now we are ready to actually define our transfer function rules. And the first case I'm going to take is that we have a successor statement S and then we have n different predecessor statements that are reaching S through these different edges that are pointing to S. And so I'm going to, this is just a generalization of the case where there's some statement that has one or more predecessors, including the case where there's only one predecessor. And the first rule says that if any of these statements, if any of the outs of this, if CPIX out is bottom for any i, then CSXN is also bottom. So if it is, let's say bottom and it could be anything here, so let's say C1, C2, but if one of them is bottom, then this is going to be bottom. So if any of them is bottom, if any of the predecessor out points evaluates the value to bottom, then the input value at S is also going to be bottom. And this is because it is possible for the execution to reach S through that particular path of PI, where the value is bottom. And recall that bottom basically means we are not sure that it's a constant. And so because on that path, we are not sure it's a constant. And so we have to basically take the conservative safe answer and say, oh, we are not sure even at S whether it's a constant or not. Even if it was constant on all other predecessors, but even if there was one predecessor where it was bottom, which means we are not sure on this particular predecessor whether it's a constant, then we have to say that at the beginning of S, the value is also bottom. So that's our first rule. So we have already done our first rule now. 

Let's look at our second rule. It says if CPIX out is C and CPJX out is D, such that C is not equal to D, then CSXN equals bottom. So it's basically saying that if there exists two different predecessors, let's say P2 and let's say PN, and they basically evaluate to C and D, then irrespective of what other predecessors evaluate to, the value at the beginning of S is going to be bottom. And what's the rationale for this? Well, once again, there are two predecessors and which execution could flow in from any of those predecessors. Sometimes it may flow in from PI, in which case it would be C. Sometimes it may flow in from PJ, in which case it would be D. And so clearly there are some paths on which it's either C and there are some paths on which it is D. So I cannot definitely say that it's going to be always a constant. Sometimes it's not C, sometimes it's not B. So we cannot say that it's a constant. So it's just the safe answer here is just bottom. 

Let's look at the third rule. It says if CPIX out is C, so for some predecessor, the out value is small c, or CPIX out is top. On some predecessor, it is top. And this is true for all i. So either it is C or it is top. So let's say this is C, this is top, this is C, and maybe there's some C, some top, some C, some top. But notice that it's all Cs, it's the same C everywhere, first of all. And then it's either all Cs or all tops, or some Cs and some tops, but the Cs are the same. In that case, we can say that CSXN is equal to C. In that case, we can say that this value here is also C. Now, what is the rationale here? The rationale here is that some of the predecessors are reachable, but I'm sure that if they are reached, then the value of X at that point, of the out of that point is definitely small c. Some other predecessors are unreachable because they value to top. And so all the reachable predecessors are always going to give me C. And then there are some predecessors that are unreachable, which are going to just, I don't know the answer. So it's not going to be even reachable. So the ones that are unreachable, I can just ignore because I'm sure that they're not reachable. So I'm basically saying that execution cannot flow from that path. They're unreachable because they're evaluating X to top. And top recall is basically that the statement is unreachable, at least unreachable so far. And so at least so far, I can say confidently that by the time the execution is going to reach the beginning of S, then the value is going to be C because either it's not reachable through some of the paths or the other paths where it is reachable, it's going to value X to C. So that's the third rule. 

And the fourth rule is if CPIX out is top for all I, so for all I, the value is top, then the value is top in the beginning of S as well. So in the previous rule and third rule, we said there are at least one PI in which it is small c and the others could be top or small c, then the value is c. But if all of the predecessors are top, then the value computed at the beginning of S is also top. So what is the rationale for this? It's basically that if all my predecessors are unreachable, then I am also unreachable. 

Now our next few rules, our first four rules were basically relating the out of the predecessor to the in of the successor. Our next few rules are going to relate the in of the statement for some statement S to the out of that statement. So this point to this point. So our first rule says that if CSX in, which is the value just before the statement is top, then CSX out is also top. And the idea is that if the input of the statement is unreachable, then the output of that statement is also unreachable because the statement is not going to get executed and so the output is also unreachable. The sixth rule says that if it is not true that rule five applies, which means CSX in is not top, then if the statement is of the form X is colon equal to C, which means a constant C is assigned to the variable X, then the value of X at the out of the statement X is colon equal to C, recall that this is basically representing my statement S. So the value of capital C at the out point of small s is small c, where small c is a constant. So this also makes sense. Irrespective of what is the value before X is colon equal to C, it could be top, bottom, some other constant B doesn't matter or even C doesn't matter. Because it's assigning a constant C, the value just after this assignment is going to be C and that's just coming from the execution semantics of the program because I'm sure that just after this particular statement, the value of X is going to be a constant C. 

Our seventh rule says once again, if five does not apply, so five does not apply means that CSX in is not equal to top, then C of a statement X equals some other function, which is not a constant. So something like Y plus Z or Y into Z or whatever. So if there's some X is equal to F of something and then I can say that this is just going to evaluate to bottom. So because it's assigning some value to X, I cannot say what is the value that's being assigned because if it's some combination of some expression, maybe it's some Y plus Z or something like that, then the value that's going to be computed just after the statement is going to be bottom irrespective of what was the value at the input. So maybe the value at input was something, let's say it was some capital C, then the output is always going to be bottom in this case because the statement itself is just assigning to X some random value that I cannot figure out just by looking at the program. And so I'm just going to conservatively I cannot say that it's a constant and that's my bottom value that I'm using for the out of the statement S. 

And finally, our last rule is that if there is a statement S which is assigning to some other variable Y, where Y is not equal to X, then the value that was flowing in is the same value that's going to flow out of that particular statement. So C of Y colon equal to something, X comma out is going to be the same value that was flowing in to this particular statement. So whatever is the in value is also the out value. So C of the statement comma X comma out is equal to C of the same statement X comma in. If that statement is just assigning to some other variable Y and not really modifying X and that also makes intuitive sense. 

All right, so we have these eight rules relating S relating the values of X at different program points and that's basically captured by this function called C S X and in or out to the value. So in other words, these eight rules are relating these values to the value of this function at a predecessor point. So for some S it's basically saying and for some value in or out it's basically saying what should be this value related to the value at some predecessor point. That predecessor could be in the case of out it's going to be the in of the same statement and in the case of in it's going to be the out of a predecessor statement P I. And I claim that these rules are exhaustive that is they cover all possibilities and you can check that for yourself. And so now I'm interested in solving for the solutions. These are just rules saying okay if this is this then this will be this this will be this and this will be this. 

And so you can think of this as a system of equations all right. Just like you may have studied about systems of equations in linear algebra and you say okay this is a system of equations you want to find a solution that satisfies the system of equations. Just like that this is also a system of equations that basically say relating the C values the capital C values at different program points. And we are interested in identifying values for this function C such that all eight rules are satisfied. So we're just interested in some solution to this system of equations okay. And that solution is going to be our answer hopefully and then we can just use that answer to do our constant propagation. So now how do I find a solution to this system of equations? 

Now the first thing I would like to point out here is that there's a trivial solution to this system of equations which is I just assign bottom to all values of C. So I just say C Sx in out is equal to bottom for all S. And that's you can check for yourself that all the eight rules are going to get satisfied with this particular solution. But this solution is not this solution is a trivial solution because basically I'm saying that I cannot be sure about anything about any point and that's a solution that satisfies all these equations. But it's not a very useful solution because that solution doesn't really allow me to do any transformation because I have to just safely assume that nothing can be a constant anyway. And but the point is that this system of equations actually has a trivial solution which is a set every point program point to bottom. We are not just interested in any solution because this trivial solution is also one solution so that's not that's not useful. We are interested in the most precise solution for some notion of precision right. So we are interested in the most precise solution a solution that is going to give me the most try to give me the as precise answer as possible for this system of equations. So for example whatever I mean the precision if I can say for sure that some you know if there was a solution which actually gives three a constant value to some program points then that's a more precise solution than something that just gives bottom to all program points right. Similarly if I can be sure that some program points are not reachable then that's useful information because then I can just remove that part of the code completely as dead code right. So those are more precise solutions than just saying that everything is bottom. So we are interested in the most precise solution how we define precision how do we arrive at the most precise solutions these are all you know questions that we're going to answer later on in the course but we just need to know that we are interested in some solution that is not just the trivial solution hopefully the most precise solution. 

Okay so here is the algorithm to try and identify the most precise solution at every at every entry s to the program set c s x in to bottom. So at all entry points of the program conservatively set the value to bottom because we don't know what the value of x could be at the entry point of a program. So just conservatively set it to I don't know that's bottom right and then at every other statement s which is non-entry set c s x in to top. Okay so initially just assume that now everything else is not reachable it's just the entry points that are reachable all right and then as we are going to start executing our analysis then some points are going to start becoming reachable and so on and we are going to you know modify the values accordingly. I'm just giving you an algorithm we're going to analyze this algorithm later in the course but let's at least first understand what the algorithm is and then for every statement s set c s x out to top. So notice that in the first two rules I'm just setting the in values and just disambiguated between entry point statements and non-entry statements. So for entry statements I'm setting the in to bottom for non-entry I'm setting the in to top and for all other for all statements irrespective of whether they're entry or non-entry I'm setting the out to top. So pretty much the entire program is set to top except the in points of the entry statements all right and finally this is the important point I'm going to repeat until all points satisfy rules 128. So I'm going to keep repeating the following step which is you know which is I'm going to talk about it until all points satisfy rules 128. So first the first thing I want to point out is this particular initialization state where the entry points are set to bottom and everything else is set to top does not really satisfy rules 128 right because it would actually fail one of the first four rules because the entry is bottom then how can the you know how can the in of entry is bottom then how can the out of entry be top right because now in is reachable then out should also be reachable and it should probably depending on what the input statement is it could be either c or bottom or something like that and so we're going to be going to keep modifying this in this way so we're going to repeat until all points satisfy rules 128 we pick some statement s that does not satisfy the rules 128 and update using the appropriate rule right so for example I just gave you this example that there's a statement s at entry the input of that the input value of that s is bottom the output value is top and so here is a statement s that does not satisfy some rule and so we're going to update the out value so that it starts satisfying that rule all right so that's what we're going to do and and we're going to keep repeating this until all points satisfy rules 128 okay and this is my algorithm what is the guarantee that eventually I will find all points that satisfy all rules 128 well let me just claim that there is a guarantee that this will eventually converge and we are going to get an answer what is the guarantee that this is going to give us the most precise answer well once again we'll have to define precision but there are some properties that that can be proven about this particular algorithm okay so for example in the worst case for example this this algorithm could converge to a solution to the trivial solution where it just sets all the values to bottom but hopefully this algorithm is going to converge something better and we're going to see examples where it does does better this algorithm is called the fixed point iteration algorithm all right so because it's called a fixed point iteration algorithm because you keep applying the same rule which is you pick some s which does not satisfy rules and then you change it so that it starts satisfying the rules right and you keep doing this till all the points start satisfying the rules so that's my algorithm the such algorithms are called fixed point iterations because you basically have a set of rules which basically say what should be true and then if it's not true then you make it true and you keep doing this until you make everything true and that that point where you make everything true is basically called the fixed point solution or just the fixed point for short
