Title: Compiler Design Module 90 : Reaching Definitions
Video ID: xmj5shfHq4U
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

Now I want to introduce another very popular data flow analysis, which is called the reaching definitions analysis. To understand what is reaching and definitions and why we need it, let's try to run the constant propagation analysis, the constant propagation DFA, on this particular example. So in this example, this is a control flow graph. It has six different basic blocks. In the first basic block, we are assigning A to 4. Then there is branching and then on one branch B is assigned 1. On another branch B is assigned 2 plus Z for some variable Z. And then they both meet at a single basic block, which again branches. And in this part of the branch, there is some computation S equals S plus A into B. I equals I plus 1 and then there is a loop back to the condition I is less than N. This whole part is the loop and this is probably the portion of the program where the program is going to spend most of its time because that's the loop. And typically loops will be executing thousands if not millions or billions of time in the lifetime of a program. Whereas if the statement is not within a loop, it will probably only execute one or few number of times. On the other hand, if I is not less than N, then this branch is basically the loop exit and this loop exit basically returns using the return statement. Now, if we run the constant propagation algorithm on this particular example, then we will see. And if we want to basically look at this particular program point, so just before just before S equals S plus A into B, I want to know whether A is a constant and whether B is a constant at this point. So what do you think? So the question that we want to ask is what are the definitions of A and B that may reach here? And if some of those definitions are constant or not? So, for example, when I look at A, then A comma 4 may reach this point, right? And in fact, when we do the constant propagation DFA, then we were going to infer the relationship A comma 4 because on all possible program paths, right? So what are all the possible program paths that can reach this program point? Notice that this is a possible program path. This is a possible program path. This and a loop is a possible, one iteration of the loop is a possible program path. Two iterations of the loop are possible. So there's actually potentially unbounded number of paths that can reach this program. But we can prove using our constant propagation DFA that on all such paths, A will always have the hold the value 4 by the time the control reaches this point in the program. Now we can do this because and it's easy to see this because no matter what path it is, it has to go through the first basic block and the first basic block we're setting A to 4. And our DFA is also supposed to return this answer and it will return the answer based on the DFA that we formulated in the previous modules. Now let's look at B. So when we look at B, then we say that, OK, on this particular program path here, B is 1 and on this particular program path here, B is 2 plus Z. And then even when I take the loop, B remains unchanged. So on one of the program paths is B equals 1 and on the other program path, it's B, it's 2 plus Z. So there are two possible values of B that can reach here. Now in our constant propagation algorithm, we would just say, oh, that means B is not a constant and we would set B to bottom. So that's how we will deal with it. But in the reaching definitions analysis, we are going to do a more fine grained analysis. First of all, we are not going to restrict ourselves to constant definitions. So not only am I going to look at B, 1 type of associations, but also, you know, this is a definition which is basically B is associated with 2 plus Z. So in this particular definition, B is being assigned 2 plus Z. And I say that what are all the definitions that can reach this point? Well, it is B, it is B colon equals 1. So if I label this statement, let's call this S1 and I call this S2, then S1 and S2 are the two definitions of B that may reach this particular program point. Let me call this program point P. So S1 and S2 may reach program point P. And compare this with, for example, available expressions. Available expressions would have said that, oh, because on this path, the expression 1 is available on this path, the expression 2 plus Z is available on this path. But then at the meet point, I would take the intersection and I would say, oh, there's no expression that's available on it because I want to basically ensure that it's available on all paths. So on one of the paths, it's 1, on one of the paths, it's 2 plus Z. So I'm going to say in my available expressions, recall that the meet operator was an intersection. And so I'm just going to say, oh, I don't have any value in B. But in my reaching definitions, I'm not going to do that. I want to say, okay, you know, S1 is reaching here, which is assigning 1 to B and S2 is reaching here on this path and that's assigning 2 plus Z to B. And now same thing for P. So even if I go back around the loop, it would be only either S1 or S2 that reach here because B is not being modified inside the loop. Now, how is this information useful? So basically, this is called the reaching definitions analysis. We're going to look at it in slightly more detail later as well. But basically, we are interested in knowing that at a given program point, what are all the definitions of B that may reach that program point? And in this case, there are two definitions of B that may reach. If the set of definitions that may reach a program point is a singleton set, which means only one definition can reach, and that definition is a constant, for example, then, you know, we'll have a constant propagation is going to P and can be kind of implemented in this way, right? Or available expressions would say that, okay, it needs to be a singleton set, right? Or things like that. So reaching definitions is kind of being more relaxed and saying, okay, even if there are multiple things, I want to know all of the things. Now, you may ask, what is the reason for collecting multiple definitions of B? And here is one interesting transformation that can be done. So first of all, I can just replace A by 4 because I know it's a singleton set. So it's very similar to constant propagation algorithm. It's a singleton set and it's a constant for A, and so I can just replace it by that constant. In this case, that happens to be the constant 4. But even for B, what I can do is I can specialize the code. So I say, because in this case, I know that there are only two definitions that are reaching, and one of them is a constant and the other is not a constant. So the one that's constant is 1, and the one that's not a constant is 2 plus Z. So I can specialize the code. So on one branch, I can replicate the code. The entire loop can be replicated for the branch where B equals 1, and then the same code can be replicated again for the branch which is for B equals 2 plus Z. Now, what is the advantage of doing that? Well, the advantage of doing that is now because on this particular branch, B equals 1, I avoid a multiplication, right? So it becomes because I know B is 1, and now on this branch, I can just do constant propagation and then get B to be, replace B by 1, and so I can basically improve the performance of my loop. And recall, we said that the loop is where the program is spending most of its time. So even though we are duplicating the code, which means we are increasing the code size of the program, typically, we will be making the program faster because the loop will probably execute thousands, if not millions or billions of times. And so this removal of a multiplication operator in the body of the loop is going to be a meaningful optimization. So this is just one of the applications of reaching definitions. There are many more applications, but I just wanted to motivate it with an example. So how are we going to implement reaching definitions? Well, reaching definition basically involves keeping track of statements which are basically of the form, let's say, X colon equals some function of Y and Z. So I'm using plus as a function. So let's say X colon equals Y plus Z. Then we need to define the transfer function of the statement. So the transfer function is, we're going to define it in terms of the gen set and the kill set, as we said that some of the transfer functions can be expressed just as a characteristic of the statement. And typically, you say, what are elements of the set that are being generated and what are elements of the set that are being killed? And in this case, first of all, what is the domain of values? The domain of values for our reaching definition expression is going to be statements which are characterized by the LHS of that statement, in this case X, and the RHS of the statement, which is Y plus Z, which is the expression that's being put into X. So firstly, it's going to be a forward data flow analysis because reaching definitions is basically what are the definitions that are reaching at a particular program point? So the direction of flow of information is forward because I want to know what is happening before my... At any program point, I need to know the reaching definitions that are coming from upstairs or from the beginning of the program or from the earlier parts of the program. And so that's why it's a forward data flow analysis. That's an easy way to figure out whether it's forward data flow analysis or backward data flow analysis. If the information is moving from the bottom of the program, then it's a backward data flow analysis. If the information is moving from the top of the program, then it's a forward data flow analysis. So in this case, it's a forward data flow analysis. So what is the gen set for this particular thing? Well, it's the statement itself, itself which is you know you can say s colon x comma y plus z you can represent it either as a statement or as the pupil lhs comma rhs so lhs comma rhs is x comma y plus z and what is the kill set when anything else that was defining that that already had x in it so any other definition that had x in it because that definition has now been overwritten by s right because if some let's say there was x equals 10 that was coming on this path but now i have said s equals y plus z then 10 is no longer reaching the point after this statement right because by reaching definitions i mean the definitions that basically have can potentially reach that point and so if a definition has been occluded which means overwritten then we kind of want to kill that and so that's why this is kill s equals anything that is assigning to x all right and what's the meet operator now in this case the meet operator is going to be set union operator and that's the big difference between reaching definitions and the other analysis that we have seen so far is including constant propagation and available expressions where the where the meet operator was intersection so why is the meet operator a union well because we are basically interested in all the definitions that may reach that point so if the definition may reach on any path then we want to count it right so whenever there's a word any then we want to use union whenever there's a word all then we want to use intersection so in the case of reaching definitions we were interested in any in the definitions that may reach that point on any path and that those are the definitions that we want to call reaching definitions and thus the meet operator is going to be union so you can say in s equals union of out p1 dot dot out pn so what is the ordering if union is the meet operator what does it mean it means that the greatest lower bound operator is represented by union so what does it tell us about the ordering well you know i leave this a little bit as homework but think about it the greatest lower bound is basically defined as glv equals x comma y equals z if z if z is less than equal to x and z is less than equal to y and z is the maximum such value so if i'm doing union what do you think should be the ordering such that glv comes out to be union out to be union well it's you know here's the hint it's going to it's probably going to have something to do with the superset operator so something is less than equal to something if it is the superset of so x is less than equal to y if x is a superset of y and that's you know that's just you know in earlier cases you may have we have used subset this time you're using superset and that's that's what's the difference between intersection so notice that you know i can just say what is the meet operator or i could have just specified the ordering now the amount of information contained in these two statements that the glv is a union or i could have just said the ordering is superset it's the same amount of information we're going to discuss this in more detail more formally later on as well now let's compare reaching definitions with available expressions so they are very similar you know x colon equals y plus z let's say the same statement then gen s is identical it's x colon x comma y plus z kill s is basically anything that is you know that has x in the left hand side and also anything that has x on the right hand side because when we are doing available expressions we are worried about expressions when we are doing reaching definitions we are worried about definitions and so there's a difference between definitions and expressions and because we are interested in expressions when we are talking about available expressions you know we want to kind of kill anything where x is also we want to also kill anything where x is appearing on the right hand side which means because x has now been updated so now you know let's say the expression that was present already in my set was x plus z then because x has been redefined now x plus z is no longer available in whatever it was available let's say y it's no longer available so we want to kill that whereas no such restriction needs to be there when we are talking about definition so there are two differences here one is you know so and the other thing is that the meet operator here is intersection because we wanted the expression to be available in all parts and we have talked about the ordering the ordering in this case would be the subset operator whereas the ordering in this case would be the superset operator okay so the two major differences between available expressions and reaching definitions one is here we are talking about expressions here we are talking about definitions so s is a definition y plus z is an expression okay and also here we want it to be available on all program paths here we are interested in any program path and so that makes the difference in the meet operator
