Title: Compiler Design Module 38 : Soundness of a Typesystem
Video ID: QHMdzUYhJH8
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

Okay, so far we have been discussing type checking and we said that type checking proves facts of the type of the form expression E is of type T. Now, and we also saw an example. Now, when we are doing type checking or type inference, we are basically constructing a proof either to check whether something is of type of the annotated type or to infer the types and this proof is on the structure of the abstract syntax tree of the expression E, right. So, for example, when we said what is the type of 1 plus 2, you know, we basically formed an abstract syntax tree which looked like plus 1 and 2 and then we said okay 1 is of type int and 2 is of type int using the int rules and then from there we derived that 1 plus 2 is of type int. Alright, so notice that the proof basically has the same structure as the AST. We are first finding the types of the leaf nodes and then from there we are moving upwards. So, proof actually has the same shape of the AST as we just saw because it is on the structure of the AST, it also has the same shape as the AST. And one type rule is used at each AST node. So, we have a set of type rules. We have let's say a database of type rules and at every node in the AST, we are going to figure out which type rule to use and we're going to use one type rule depending on our set of rules and which one matches and based on that we're going to identify the type of any internal node of an AST and from there on we will keep moving on. So, one type rule is used at each AST node. So, here is a more general diagrammatic explanation. So, let's say at any point of the AST we have a node n which has i children c1 c2 dot dot c i. Maybe in my database of typing rules I have a rule which looks like the following which says if it is provable that c1 is of type t1 and it is provable that c2 is of type t2 and so on and ci is of type ti then it is provable that n is of type t. And this is just a type rule in our database of typing rules and maybe it has a name. Now, when I'm actually going to construct the proof so let's say I have some expression then I would have some actual type. So, maybe c1 has some actual type let's say a1, c2 has some actual type let's say a2 and ci has some actual type ai and then I have to check whether a1 matches with t1, a2 matches with t2, ai matches with ti and if so then this rule can be applied. So, only if these types match can this rule be applied and if the types match then I can apply this rule and I can infer that n must be of type t. So, we're going to see examples but this is basically the structure of a type checking system. So, types are computed in a bottom-up pass over the AST. So, why do I say bottom-up? So, any traversal of an AST is basically a recursive traversal where we first go down and then we come up recall the three steps when we discuss the traversal of an AST but what is interesting is that the types are basically propagated from bottom-up and as we saw in our example and as we've been discussing so we first compute the types of the leaf nodes and from there we build up and compute the types of the internal nodes and the top level node of an expression. Okay, all right now I'm going to define the notion of the soundness of a type system. So, what does it mean that a type system is sound? Well, basically informally intuitively this means that the type system agrees with the execution semantics of the language. So, what do I mean by execution semantics of a language? Well, that is what we understand the language meaning, right. So, example if I say 1 plus 2 well we understand that this has some meaning. The meaning is that it's going to execute addition on literals 1 and 2. Similarly, if I say x plus y then basically it's going to compute the addition operator on the values the runtime values of x and y. So, notice that the execution semantics is a runtime concept and it basically says when if the program is here then I evaluate the expression and when I evaluate the expression assuming the value I already know the values of the leaf nodes for example x y etc and so from there I'm going to compute the value of this particular expression and maybe I'm going to assign it to some other variable or something like that. Alright, so that meaning of an expression I'm calling it execution semantics of a programming language. So far we understand the meaning of a program already because we've been writing programs but we understand the meaning of program rather informally. Later in the course we're going to define execution semantics in a very formal way just like we are defining typing rules we'll also define semantic rules execution semantic rules but for now it just suffices to know that execution we are just interested in how the language behaves at runtime or how expressions evaluate at runtime that's what the execute semantics are. So, at runtime an expression may compute a value v for some existing values of all the leaf nodes right so and maybe it's getting computed over and over again but whatever it is it may compute a value v first time it may compute v1 second time v2 v3 whatever right. So that's an execution behavior on the other hand this type checking or type inference algorithm is assigning a type to every expression so you know we have judgments of the type and expression is of type T or what we also say E is E colon T. So this is this type proof is basically constructed through a bottom-up application of the typing rules on the AST as we just discussed. Notice that this has nothing to do at least so far with the execution semantics we're just applying the rules but it's important however that these typing rules are in agreement with the execution rules. For example I can't just have a typing rule in my system which says one plus if one is an integer and two is an integer then one plus two will be a string right or in general if E1 is an integer or E2 is an integer and E2 is an integer then E1 plus E2 would be a string. Now that would violate I mean that's you know that's as good a typing rule as any other because it's just a rule that you're specifying and the checker is supposed to check against those rules but that rule does not agree with the execution semantics of the language because in the execution semantics the plus operator is supposed to indicate addition and and so it's not clear how you could get a string from addition so the typing rule will not agree with the execution semantics and so that is where the notion of soundness comes in. Informally speaking a type system is sound if all the rules in the type system agree with the execution semantic rules. An expression computes a value V if it is evaluated multiple times it can compute different values say V1, V2, V3 but statically when at compile time an expression is identified to be of type T there's a unique single type T associated with that expression. We say that a type system is sound if whenever E is of type T as determined by our typing rules then E will always evaluate to a value V1, V2, V3 whatever it evaluates to whenever it evaluates to all those values V1, V2, V3 will be such that they may have type their own types S1, S2, S3 and so on such that all such types of V1, V2, V3 which I'm you know let's say it computes a value V which is of type S then S must be a subtype of T right so for example if it computed value V1 which had type S1 then S1 should be a subtype of T so all values that are ever computed for E at runtime should be of dynamic type S such that the dynamic type is a subtype of the static type as computed through my typing rules at compile time. So what is the use of a type system being sound well if a type system is unsound that means if it didn't obey this this definition this rule then it is possible that a type correct program exhibits errors at runtime so for example you know it is possible that at runtime a variable I let's say you know at compile time I determine that I is of type int but there is no guarantee at runtime that I will actually evaluate to a value V of type int maybe it will evaluate to a value of type character at runtime and if that so if a type system is unsound then it's possible that at runtime it evaluates to a type which is different and which is not a subtype of the static type that was identified at compile time so if a type system is unsound a type correct program can exhibit type errors I should say type errors at runtime whereas if a type system is sound then you can be sure that there will be no type errors at runtime which means that you know wherever the type system determined that I will be an int you will only get int values at that point for any possible execution of that program so soundness is very important for that reason because it basically catches errors early so if there was an error in the program where a potentially non-int value could appear for I and then I'm using it in an int context maybe then that error will be caught at compile time and we won't have to wait all the way till runtime to catch that error in general the soundness of type system can be ascertained by checking the soundness of each type so if you just look at each of your type rules and check whether it's actually sound just like I gave you the example of the add type rule so indeed this type rule is sound because the the execution semantics of the plus operator agree with this particular type okay in our type system we only want sound type rules but it's not just enough to be sound we actually want precise type rules as well all right so some type rules are better and by better I mean more precise than others all right so here's an example now one of my type rules could be that if one is an int and two is an int then one plus two is a void now is this a sound type rule well I was claimed that this is a sound type all right let's look at another other type rule it says if one is an int and two is an int then one plus two is an int is this a sound type rule I claim that this is also a sound type rule so why do I claim that both of these are sound type rules notice that I'm assuming in my language that void is a supertype of all other types and so anything I compute will always be of type void and so so it is sound I don't you know I cannot I cannot contest the fact that this is sound because void is supertype of int and by definition of supertype subtype anything any value that gets computed is actually of type void and so this this type rule is actually sound by a definition of soundness but it is not very useful in fact this rule is more useful right because this is more precise it's not just saying that it's void which is which is true it's also saying that actually an int it's going to be an int so it's saying more than what the first type rule says saying and so while the first one is sound but imprecise the second one is sound and more precise and we want the most most precise possible thing in our sound in our typing rules because that will help us accept more programs so for example if I if this was my typing the first one was my typing rule in my type system then if I have a program which is one plus two plus three this would be rejected by the first rule first type system but it would be accepted by the second type system why would it be rejected by the first type system well the first type system would infer that one plus two is of type void and then I can't use plus on a void right so that that won't kind of I won't have any type rule which says you know if e1 is of type void and e2 is of type int then what should be the result I won't have a type rule and so my type check would fail on the other hand if I use a second rule then that type check would succeed so if I have sound rules it would still accept all all the programs that it accepts would still be correct but it would leave out some incorrect programs right it'll leave out some correct programs so if the type system is sound then it only accepts correct programs however we want precise type system because if it's imprecise if it is if it is not giving the full information then it's also going to exclude some correct programs also which we don't want so the second one is sound precise the first one has sound and imprecise
