Title: Compiler Design Module 54   Code Generation for Function Calls
Video ID: B80TpNQY7KA
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

So, now that we have discussed code generation for arithmetic operators and if-then-else style branching, let's now discuss something more which is code generation for function call dispatch. So, one of the big differences between the high level language that we are using now and the language that we had earlier on expressions only is the ability to do make function calls and that really increases the power of the language. For example, now we have the idea of recursion and in other words recursion is just one form of looping and so now our language also has loops and things like that. So, before we can talk about code generation for function call dispatch, recall that code generation and activation record design need to be done simultaneously. So let's first talk about the activation record design. Now here is one way to organize your activation record and this is the way that I am going to use, this is the strategy that I am going to use for my code generation for the language that we discussed. Recall that we have our result, the arguments, there is something called the control link which basically points to the activation record of the caller and then there is the return address which is the code address at which you should return after you are done executing the current callee. Now for our code generation strategy, these are the invariants that we are going to follow. The result we are going to put it in the register A0. This works well for us because in any case one of the invariants of a code generation strategy is that the value of an expression is available after it is computed in the register A0 and you can imagine that the value of a function called dispatch is the return value and so even that is available in A0 so things remain consistent. So the result is going to appear in A0. The arguments will be on the stack and they will be laid out from the last argument down to the first argument. So if I look from the bottom up then I would see the first argument first, the second argument second and so on. Similarly for the control link we will introduce the notion of a frame pointer. So recall that we said that the control link may or may not be necessary depending on whether we can use the stack pointer, the top of the stack to identify the current AR and then use the contiguous array layout of the stack of ARs to identify the AR of the caller. So in our strategy we are going to use the frame pointer and we will also briefly discuss if there was no frame pointer then how would we go about it. What the frame pointer is going to point to, so recall that the stack pointer points to the top of the activation record. The frame pointer would point conceptually speaking to the bottom of the activation record. So we have two pointers, the stack pointer and the frame pointer and both of them would be pointing, would be marking out or outlining the activation record. One of them would be close to the bottom, the other one would be close to the top and then when I return then I am going to shift both these pointers up to the caller. We are going to see this in more detail and finally the return address that's also going to live on the stack. So notice that this information, arguments, control link and the return address would live on the stack and $SP which is the stack pointer register will track the current stack top. So because the stack grows downwards this is where let's say $SP will point at some point in the function execution. Of course while the function is executing maybe allocating more temporary variables or other variables in which case $SP could be moving dynamically during the evaluation of the body of the function. But we are going to introduce another register called the frame pointer and there is actually a register in MIPS architecture called FP which is meant to be for the frame pointer and this is used to track the current AR and that would typically point somewhere near the bottom of the current AR. Alright, so here is what the AR layout is going to look like. The stack grows downwards as always. The frame pointer, so let's say I am currently executing in the callee. So let's say this part is the callee. So the frame pointer is going to point to the start of the activation record of the callee and then the stack pointer, the frame pointer is going to point to the bottom of the activation record of the callee and stack pointer is going to point to the top of the activation record of the callee. Also just above the frame pointer we would have information that would basically allow us to return back to the caller's activation record and caller's code address. So for example, before the callee was called, what was the return address? So what is the return address that's stored here? What were the arguments with which this callee was called? That's also available on the stack. And then what is the old frame pointer? This is similar to our control link. So that's going to, old frame pointer means frame pointer of the caller. So when I return, I want to load the old frame pointer into $FP and so on, right? So that's what we are going to do. And when I return, I want to basically move the stack pointer. I want to remove all this stuff. So when I'm going to return, I'm going to remove all this stuff, put my SP here, somewhere here, right in the caller's context, and the frame pointer would point to whatever is the old FP. And old FP based on our conventions is going to be pointing somewhere above the stack pointer all the time, right? So that's old FP, by the invariance that we are maintaining, would always be something that's a higher address than the stack pointer, all right? So this is the size of an activation record, which is the old FP, the arguments, and the return address. The size of the AR, I mean the size of the AR at just function entry and the callee entry time. This is all the information that's required to dispatch the function call. That needs to be saved. This is the old frame pointer, the arguments with which the callee was called, and the return address. So what's the size of the AR? If n is the number of arguments, 1 dot dot n, then the size of the AR is four into n plus eight. Four for each argument, four for the old frame pointer, and four for the return address. So the size becomes four into n plus eight in our strategy. Okay. Now also, what part is populated by the caller and what part is populated by the callee? This is also a part of my AR design. It's not just enough to say what are the contents, but what is populated by what. This is part of the calling conventions contract. And this also needs to be decided at code generation time. And in this case, I'm going to ensure that... So clearly the arguments need to be populated by the caller, right? Because the callee cannot know what are the arguments. The actual arguments are going to be populated by the caller. Also, the old frame pointer will be populated by the caller because it's a caller's frame pointer. So the callee won't know what is the frame point of the caller. And so these n plus four, four into n plus four words, the arguments and the old frame pointer is populated by the caller. The return address is populated by the callee, and we're going to see how that is done. And so that's the breakdown of what is populated by the caller and what is populated by the colleague. Okay, before we can talk about the code generation for a function called dispatch, we'll introduce two more relevant MIPS off-codes. One is called jump and link JAL to a label. What it does is it branches to the label. This is a typo. This is branches to label and saves the address of the next instruction in a register called RA. So the MIPS architecture has a special register. Recall that there were 32 registers in RA in the MIPS architecture, and one of them is called RA. So what JAL, the label, does is it branches to label and saves the address of the next instruction in $RA. Now, this is going to implement our function call, as you can imagine. It's going to jump to the function entry. It'll be used to jump to the function entry, and such that, during the jump, the return address is stored to this register called RA, so that when the colleague wants to return, it can use RA to return back. All right, and then there is this instruction called jump register reg. That's going to be used to jump to a register, so branch to the address stored in the register. And you can imagine that this is typically used to jump to the return address register. And this is jump register $RA basically implements a function return in the MIPS architecture. All right, so with that background, let's look at the code generation for a function called dispatch. So let's say there's a function that appears in my, on the caller side, which says F, and then some arguments which are the expressions. Notice that these are actual arguments, so the actual expression values. So the first thing I do is I save the current frame pointer. Recall that in our AR, the first thing in the stack was the old FP. So I first save the old FP. So that's what the first two instructions are doing. They just store word $FP, $0 SP. We'll just store the frame pointer at the top of the stack, and then decrement the stack pointers. In other words, these two are pushing the frame pointer to the top of the stack. Then generate the code for all the arguments. And recall that the arguments were laid out in the reverse order. So the first argument that I'm going to generate the code for is EN, the last. So I'm going to generate the code for EN, then EN minus one, and so on. So I first generate code for EN, and then whatever is the result, I will expect it in the register A0, and so I push A0 to the stack using these two instructions, store word and add image and update. And I keep doing this for all the arguments until I reach E1, so code generation for E1, and then push the value to the top of the stack again. Finally, make the function call using the JAL F entry opcode. Now, notice that everything on the caller side, at this point, basically what I have in the stack is old FP, and then all the arguments laid out from the last argument to the first argument. And now this is where $SP points at function entry. Now, by the time the control reaches the first instruction in function entry, the return address register would be populated with the return address. So $RA would be populated with the return address, and so the first thing that the callee may want to do is to push $RA to the stack, and that would complete our activation record. All right, so this is the callee side code. The first thing that, so this is code gen for a function definition. This is the def keyword, the identifier of the function, the formal arguments x1.xn equals E, which is the body of the function. So the question is, how do I generate the code for such a function definition? So first of all, there is, we need to generate a new label for every function identifier called, let's say, F underscore entry, and this is the label that is going to be used with the JAL instruction for every function called dispatch to this particular function. And the first thing we do is we move $SP to $FP. Why do we do this? Well, this is basically representing the new frame pointer, the new bottom of the activation record. So I've just entered the function. What is the activation record's bottom? It's the current value of the stack pointer, which is current value of the top of the activation record. Because the stack pointer can keep growing and shrinking as we evaluate the body, but the frame pointer would remain constant, which would point to the bottom of the activation record, all right? Then we store word, the return address to the top of the stack. So we just push the return address, which is in register RA, to the top of the stack by using these two instructions, forward and addIU. And then we are ready to generate the code for E, which is the body of the function. After we are done generating the code for E, we load the return address from the top of the stack. We call the top of the stack as $4 plus SP, and we load that into the return address register. We restore the stack pointer to where it was before the call, which means that I add a constant Z, where Z is just four into N plus eight, which is exactly the size of the activation record. So I restored the stack pointer back to where it was before the function call dispatch must have started. Notice that some part of the Z was actually populated by the caller, but it is being deallocated by the callee. So for example, the part where the arguments are stored or the part where the old frame pointer is stored, that part of the activation record was allocated by the caller, but is getting deallocated by the callee. Now, this is just a design choice in this particular code generation strategy. It is also perfectly possible to deallocate that part of the activation record inside the caller, not in the callee. Notice that in the caller, after the function call return, I didn't really generate any instructions. So if I go back, if I go back to this particular instruction, JAL, F entry, I didn't have any code. So after I return, I would expect my control to be exactly after the JAL instruction. So at this point, and at this point I don't do any cleanup, right? So I'm assuming that the callee has done all the cleanup for me. And this is just a strategy. I could have put some more instructions here if I wanted, but I'm not doing that. And so in this case, the callee is basically doing all the cleanup. And one of the cleanup items is that you need to deallocate the stack space by popping off Z number of bytes. And that's done by just increment, just adding Z to $SP, where Z is four into N plus eight. N is the number of arguments. Finally, we want to restore the old frame pointer. And the old frame pointer, based on this arithmetic, you will be able to see that it is available at zero plus $SP. And so I can just load that into $SP. And now I can return to the return address, which was populated earlier in my code generation strategy. Okay. Now, once again, I may ask you the question, why do I need to push the RA and then load it again? Could I just not have had to push the RA and just load it in the $RA register? The answer is really easy. The code gen of E could have clobbered RA. And so I need to push it to the stack and then pop it back because I can't trust that $RA is not clobbered inside E. All right. But if I push it to the stack, then we are safe because of our invariance that code gen will not modify the stack in any way. All right. So if I look at the stack states during a procedure call, let's say this is the stack state before the call, this is the caller's stack state, right? This is the caller's frame pointer and the caller's stack pointer, right? So the caller's frame pointer and the caller's stack pointer before the call. Now, just after the call on function entry of the callee, I would have the frame pointer is still pointing to the caller's frame pointer. The $fp is still pointing there. Even though I have pushed this value here. So at this point, this value is actually equal to $fp, right? Because that's exactly what I had pushed. Also, the arguments have been pushed by the caller. And so the stack pointer is pointing to the next top of the stack. And so this is what the stack would look like on function entry before executing any instruction in the function, right? Now, the first few instructions in the callee function are going to push more stuff. For example, it's going to push the return address on the stack. Also, it's going to modify the fp value. So let's look at that. Indeed, after three instructions, it's going to look like the following. It has the return address. So the first three instructions, if you recall, are you push the return address on the stack and you update the frame pointer register. And so that's exactly what's happening. I push the return address and then I have the frame pointer. The stack pointer is now pointing to one lower than the return address location. And now, at this point, it is safe for the body to execute. So body executes from here on. And the body can potentially change the stack pointer up and down, but the frame pointer would remain the same. If the body involves another function call, then the frame pointer would get saved and restored before and after the call. And so this is how my code generation strategy is going to work. Now, after the body has been executed, then the function would want to return and recall that the last few instructions in my code generation strategy were, A, they were cleaning up the stack by incrementing the stack pointer. So that's what is happening. So stack pointer is here, but I'm going to add Z to it, which is four into N plus eight. And so my stack pointer is now pointing at this location, which is old FP. Moreover, I'm going to load old FP into dollar FP. And so these two values are again going to become equal. All right. And at this point, I'm ready to resume in my caller's context. And the caller's side, I'm not going to really do anything. The only thing I'm going to do is that I'm going to assume that all this stuff below the stack pointer, including the location pointed to by the stack pointer, is now available for other stuff. And this can be assumed to be completely dead.
