Title: Compiler Design Module 89 : Gen and Kill Sets
Video ID: NRoF_6NN70M
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

So, last time we talked about how a DFA can be expressed as a transfer function and a meet function and so let's review that a little bit. The transfer function is a function that relates the in of a statement to the out of the statement. So, if the in value is v, the out value is fv where f is called our transfer function. And then we have a meet operator or a meet function, where basically the out value of a predecessor is related to the in value of a successor, right? And this holds even if there are multiple predecessors of the same statement. So, for example, it will relate out p1, out p2, out pn to in s and once again, the relation is actually a function where in s is represented as a function of outs, out p1, out p2, dot, dot, dot, out pn and we call this a meet operator, right? And so, dataflow analysis has two important components, almost, not almost, but all dataflow analysis have two important components. One is the transfer function and the other is the meet operator. Now, I should point out that I am assuming here that it's a forward dataflow analysis. If it was a backward dataflow analysis, then I would just flip the ins and outs. So, for example, if it was a backward dataflow analysis, in s would be a function, would be specified as a transfer function of out s, so just flip in and out. And similarly, out of a predecessor will be specified as a function of the in of a successor. And if there are multiple successors, then the function is going to operate on all the values of all the successors in case of a backward dataflow analysis. So the structure of computation is very much isomorphic irrespective of whether it's a forward dataflow analysis or it's a backward dataflow analysis. 

Now the other thing we discussed was to the use of gen, which is generator and kill, right, sets for to represent the transfer function. So to summarize often, but not always, it is possible to represent the transfer function through a gen s and kill s function, right, where gen is a property of the statement, that instruction, and kill is also a property of the instruction, right, and it has nothing to do with the in value or the out value or anything like that. It's just gen is a property of the statement and you can compute it statically before you even start your dataflow analysis. And the way you would typically have the structure that you would typically have is the transfer function f, f v is computed as v minus kill s union gen s. So you remove some things from v and you add some things to v. And basically, I mean, I'm assuming here that v is represented as a set, right. For example, we looked at causal propagation and said it's a set of variables to constant mappings and kill is going to remove some of those mappings, which basically means that it's going to map it to bottom and gen is going to potentially add some mappings, right. And notice that I'm saying that this is often, but not always, all right. So, for example, we looked at constant propagation and we had two options for our transfer function, one which was more precise, where we won't use just gen and kill sets to represent the transfer function, but it would be a more expensive computation and more complex computation to basically be able to figure out whether something is a constant or not. For example, it could exchange information across variables. On the other hand, there was a second option, which is a simpler option, but less precise, which would just use a gen and kill set, right. And so it's up to the designer of the DFA to decide what he or she wants to use, but the point is that even there, there is this pattern that, you know, you can kind of express the transfer function using kill and gen. In fact, we're going to see that this pattern is actually common to many transformations, many analyses, many data flow analyses that we're going to study in future. Okay. And once again, I want to point out that kill and gen are just the properties of S and they have nothing to do with N, right. And that's the whole point of, or V, and that's the whole point of, you know, that's the whole advantage that we're getting. We can pre-compute these sets and then using these sets kind of do our data flow analysis, perhaps in a faster manner. Okay. And so this part of the expression here, V minus kill S, can be thought of as the propagate part of the expression. So it's just propagating V across S, maybe after killing some things. And this is the generate part of S, you know, it's generating some more expressions, so often called propagate and generate. 


All right. So just to recap, for constant propagation, if my statement is of the form X is colon equal to C, so it's assigning a constant C to X, then gen S is just X comma C, and kill S is anything that contains X as the first element, right. So X comma star, a wild card blank here, right. On the other hand, if S was a statement which looks like X colon equals F something, some other function, which is not a constant, then gen S is just the empty set, so it's not really generating any new constant mapping, but kill S is anything that contains X as the first element, so X comma wild card star. Okay. So we have already seen this. Now let's look at one more example, which is the available expression example that we had actually looked at when we were discussing data flow analysis in the beginning. We looked at common sub-expression elimination. For that, we need available expressions analysis. And recall, what is the available expression analysis? It says, what are the expressions that are already available in some variable? So for example, when I have X colon equals Y plus Z, then Y plus Z is, after this statement is executed, Y plus Z is now available in X, so later on, if somebody says W equals Y plus Z, then I can just replace it with W equals X, because Y plus Z is already available in X. And so the gen for this particular statement, when I'm doing the available expressions pass is X comma Y plus Z, and the kill is anything that contains X either on the left as the first element or as a part of the second element, right? So in this case, my element is basically a tuple which has the variable as the first element and the expression that is contained in it as the second element. And so kill is going to be anything that involves X either as the first element or as X in the expression part. And we have discussed this before. In this case, we kill everything that has all mappings of X, because now X has a new mapping. And we also kill everything that is using X in the RHS, in the expression, because X has now been updated, and so that particular expression is no longer available at that program point. OK. 

One of the advantages of doing a basic block is that you can compute summaries. So especially, for example, if you want to compute summaries of a sequence of instructions, for example, if you have a basic block that has multiple instructions, you can compute a summary of the entire basic block. So for example, here is a basic block, S1, S2, S3. And let's say, if there's an input value V, we are interested in knowing what would be the output value, FV, and that would represent the transfer function of the entire basic block. Now, one of the advantages of using Gen and Kill is that now I can summarize the transfer function as Gen and Kill of the full basic block. And let's try to understand how that's going to happen. So the transfer function of the basic block, I'm going to call it FV of V, is going to be just the composition of the transfer function of the individual statements in the program. So because it's a forward dataflow analysis, I'll first apply the S1 transfer function. So let's call it FS1. Then I'm going to apply S2 transfer function, so let's call it FS2, and similarly FS3. So FVV equals FS3 of FS2 of FS1 V. And now recall that we already have these transfer functions as Gen and Kill sets. So I'm going to say, oh, that's just FS3 of FS2 of V minus Kill S1 union Gen S1. And now if I expand it further and apply FS2 to this whole value, then I get V minus Kill S1 union Kill S2. So there should be a bracket here. So V minus Kill S1 union Kill S2, and union Gen S1 minus Kill S2 union Gen S2. So I've just kind of expanded this particular call here, VFS2, and by using its Gen and Kill, and then just reorganized Kill S2 and Kill S1 so that they start appearing together. 

Now there's an interesting fact about this expression. And the fact is that if I look at this Kill S1 union Kill S2, that's the stuff that gets killed from V. And so you can call that as kill of the block that's formed by the two instructions, S1 semicolon S2. So kill of S1 semicolon S2, which represents the sequence of instructions, S1 and S2, is just formed by uniting the two individual Kill sets, Kill S1 union Kill S2. And similarly, the Gen of S1 semicolon S2 is Gen of S1 minus Kill of S2 union Gen of S2. So you union Gen S1 and Gen S2. But before you do that, you also kill S2. You also subtract Kill S2 from Gen S1. So idea is that whatever was generated by S1, if it is killed by S2, then you remove that. And then you union Gen S2. So basically, the point is that I can compose these, I can have summarized values of Kill and Gen for sequences of instructions, or in fact, entire basic blocks, and then that would make my data flow analysis even faster. 

So for a basic block B, Gen B, as computed using that kind of expression that we saw earlier, is just Gen of S1 minus Kill of S2 union Gen of S2. And then I can keep doing this for longer and longer sequences. That's just the locally exposed constant definitions. So if I look at constant propagation, so the keyword here is locally exposed. What does locally exposed mean? These are the definitions that are available at the end of the basic block for a forward data flow analysis, because some definitions may have been created, some mappings may have been created to constants in the middle, but maybe they have been killed by the time we reach the end. So things that were actually available at the end of the basic block, I'm calling them locally exposed for that basic block. And that's exactly what Gen B is going to look like. And notice again that Gen B is just a function of the basic block, and I can pre-compute. So even before I start my data flow analysis, I can compute Gen B for every basic block. And similarly, I can compute Kill B. And what is Kill B? Kill B is a set of constant definitions that are killed by B. And that's at the union of things that are killed by each instruction. And so that also I can pre-compute, and now my data flow analysis can work at basic block generality with the simple operators like my minus and union, and that can make my implementation faster.
