Title: Compiler Design Module 112 : Immediate Dominators
Video ID: EjI-O1RLRQI
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

So let's look at the dominator relation in more detail. Recall that node d dominates node n in a graph if and only if every path from the start node that reaches n goes through d. And also we said that the dominator relation is reflexive which means a node dominates itself. And we write ddomn to indicate that d dominates n. And if I say node dominates itself that's same as saying ndomn. Alright, so we understand what's a dominator relation. We also looked at an example to understand what it means in the context of a control flow graph. I'm going to define an other relation and that's called immediate dominance and that's derived from the dominance relation. And the idea is that we want to figure out what is the node that immediately dominates a node n. So there are many nodes that may dominate a node n. There are many nodes that must be traversed through on every path but there will be a single node that's the immediate dominator. And what is the immediate dominator? I mean intuitively it is the last node in the flow of the program that dominates this node without being equal. So the immediate dominator relation is not reflexive. Alright, so let's see. Node d immediately dominates node n in a graph written didomn if and only if d dominates n, d is not equal to n and there does not exist another node m such that m is different from both n and d and d dominates m and m dominates n. So in other words a node d immediately dominates node n if there exists no other node no third node such that you know d dominates that node and that node dominates n. So there's nothing in between d and n in terms of the dominator relation. So this is the you know this is this is the tightest domination relation for n and so that's why it's called the immediate dominator. So once again node d immediately dominates node n in a graph. If d dominates n, so it needs to dominate but then there are extra conditions. Firstly it should not be equal. Recall that dominator is a reflexive relation idom is not a reflexive relation so d cannot be equal to n and there does not exist another node such that you know there's transitivity. That means d dominates that node and that node dominates n. There should not be such a node. Only then we can say that d immediately dominates n. Alright so let's look at this example to see to understand what is the immediate dominates relation. So if I say what is the immediate dominator of n? Recall that there were many nodes that were dominating n. So there was b1 that was dominating n there was b4 that was dominating n. But if I say what is the immediate dominator of n? Is b1 an immediate dominator of n? Answer is no because b1 dominates b4 and b4 dominates n and so there is exists an intermediate node that you know that has transitivity with respect to the dominator relation and so we're not going to say that b1 does not dominate n right. So let me just write that down b1 does not but b1 does not immediately dominate n. Does not idom n okay. Does b2 immediately dominate n? The answer is no because b2 doesn't even dominate n. So forget about immediately it doesn't even dominate n because there are exists paths which can reach n without going through b2. So b2 does not dominate n. Similarly b3 does not dominate n and so b3 does not immediately dominate n either. Does b4 immediately dominate n? So firstly we have to ask the question does b4 dominate n? The answer is yes. Is b4 not equal to n? The answer is yes. Does there exist a node such that b4 dominates that node and that node dominates n? Well I can't really find any such node right. So I mean if I just look at all the other nodes no such node satisfies the condition that b4 dominates that node and that node dominates n. For example if I look at b1, b1 dominates n but b4 doesn't dominate b1 all right. So the answer is that b4 immediately dominates n. So the immediate dominator of n is b4. Now what is the immediate dominator of b3? Now we know that b1 dominates b3 and actually there is no other node that dominates b3 in this particular control flow graph and so it also satisfies the other two relations. It's not equal to and there does not exist any other node that dominates b3 and is dominated by b1. Similarly b1 immediately dominates b2. So b1 immediately dominates b3, b1 immediately dominates b4. What about b4? Which node immediately dominates b4? Now does b2 immediately dominate b4? The answer is no because b2 doesn't even dominate b4 because there exist paths from the start to b4 which do not go through b2. Similarly does b3 dominate b4? The answer is no because there exist paths that go to b4 that do not even go through b3. Does b1 immediately dominate b4? The answer is let's see b1 dominates b4 true, b1 is not equal to b4 true. Does there exist a node such that b1 dominates that node and that node dominates b4? So let's look at b2, b1 dominates b2 right but does b2 dominate b4? No. Alright similarly for b3 and so the immediate dominator of b4 is b1 okay because there is no other node such that b1 dominates that node and that node dominates b4. b2 and b3 do not satisfy that property and so the immediate dominator of b4 is actually b1. It's an interesting fact that immediate dominance relationships So if I was just I had to draw a graph where I draw you know each CFG node is a node in the new graph and then I draw an edge from one node to the other if and only if I draw an edge from node n1 to node n2 if and only if n1 immediately dominates n2 and if I do such a if I draw such a graph I'm going to end up with a tree and we can see that in this particular example as well and this is a convenient representation because now if I want to say you know check whether something dominates something I can just check whether it's reachable in this tree or not
