Title: Compiler Design Module 24 : Constructing LL1 Parsing Table
Video ID: mIT4Cp6sW38
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

So today we are going to complete our discussion on how to construct the LL1 parsing table from the first and follow sets. So for each production, A produces alpha in the grammar. If a token small t belongs to first of alpha, then we would set in our table the cell A, t to alpha, which means that if we are producing, if we are deriving from A and we need to choose a production to produce and the next look ahead symbol is small t, then we should use the derivation, the production A produces alpha. Similarly, if epsilon belongs to first of alpha, which means alpha can produce the empty string and small t belongs to follow of A, which means small t can follow A and alpha can produce epsilon, then also we would put A produces alpha as the production to use at the cell A, t in the table. So these are the two rules, once we have the first and the follow sets, then we can just use these two rules to construct the LL1 parsing table and recall that once we have the LL1 parsing table, we can have a predictive parser that's going to run in linear time based on the recursive descent algorithm. Okay, so let's take an example, it's the same running example that we have been using, the language of expressions and terms and with a start symbol that produces capital E followed by the end of input marker. Also I am showing here the first sets of each of the non-terminals, first E is, you know, for example, the left parenthesis and the integer and so on. These sets are exactly as we derived in our previous modules. Similarly, I show the follow sets also exactly as derived in our previous modules, recall that follow sets basically represent the tokens that may follow that non-terminal in some derivation starting at S. Now based on these first and follow sets, we are going to fill the cells of our LL1 parsing table. The rows of this parsing table are all the non-terminals and the columns of the parsing tables are all the terminals. Okay, so the first thing rule we are going to, let's look at the first row capital E. So, if capital E, if first, you know, if does int belong to first of E? The answer is yes and so we are going to fill the first cell here, the first cell here with Tx because E produces Tx, that's the only production and so does int belong to the first of Tx, I should say and if int belongs to the first of Tx, then E produces Tx is a valid production to use if we are producing E and the next look ahead is an int. Similarly, the open bracket belongs to the first of Tx because open bracket belongs to the first of T and so once again we put the Tx production in the corresponding cell. What about, for example, times? Does times belong to first of Tx? No, it doesn't because first of T is just open parenthesis and int and none of these is times. Also, first of T does not contain epsilon, so I don't need to even look at first of X and so the other cells in this table will remain empty which means that in those situations correspond to parsed errors. Now let's look at capital X, the second row. Now capital X has two productions, either it can produce plus E or epsilon. Now for plus E, the first of plus E is just plus, so that's easy. So if the next look ahead is plus, then I should use X produces plus E. So that's my next entry. Also notice that first of plus E does not contain epsilon, so I don't need to look at the follow of X. Now let's look at the second production, X produces epsilon. Now epsilon, so the first of epsilon is epsilon, so anything that is in follow of X, we should use and if the look ahead symbol, if the look ahead terminal is one of the follow X symbols, terminals, then I should use a second production. Alright? And so what is in follow of X? Follow of X is either dollar or close brackets. So for dollar and close brackets, I'm going to add the epsilon production, the close parenthesis. The other cells in this row will remain empty because they are neither in first nor in follow of the RHS, neither in the first of the RHS nor in the follow of the LHS. Okay, now let's look at capital T, the third row. So what are the productions for capital T? It either produces int Y or parenthesis, parenthesized capital E. Now the first, if you look at the first production, int Y, the first of that is int. So if the next look ahead token is in int, I know that this is the production I should use. So that's the first thing. So I use int Y if the next look ahead is in int. On the other hand, if the next look ahead is an open parenthesis, then I use the second production, which is parenthesized E. None of these productions produce epsilon, so we don't need to worry about the follow set of T. And with this, we have completed this third row as well. Now let's look at the fourth row, Y. Y has two productions, either it can produce epsilon or it can produce star T. So if I look at the first production, epsilon, because the first production can produce epsilon, I need to look at follow of Y. So what is follow of Y? It's plus dollar and close parenthesis. So for all these columns, plus dollar and close parenthesis, I'm going to use the first production for Y, which is epsilon. So I fill up epsilon in all these three cells appropriately. And finally, let's look at the second production. The second production cannot produce epsilon. And the first of the second production is just the star operator or the times operator. And so we're just going to have that entry in the star column. OK, so with this, we have finished, completed our LL1 parsing table. I do not show the row for capital S, but that is also very easy. And I leave that as exercise.
