Title: Compiler Design Module 124 4: Dominance Frontiers
Video ID: PpNSUf5AMoE
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

So we've been talking about how a program can be converted to SSA form and one of the primary ideas is the computation of dominance frontiers towards the conversion of a program to minimal SSA which is the minimum number of five nodes. So I'm going to define what a dominance frontier means. The dominance frontier of a node x is a set of all nodes y such that x does not strictly dominate y and x dominates some predecessor p of y. So y is in the dominance frontier of x if x does not strictly dominate y but x dominates some predecessor of y. So we're going to see this with examples and with more intuitive explanation. So let's say you know so first of all I'm going to define these relations called S-dom which means strictly dominates and x strictly dominates y if x dominates y and x is not equal to y. So pretty much x strictly dominates y if x dominates y just that it does not strictly dominate itself. Recall that the dominator relation is reflexive but the strictly dominator relation is not reflexive. Okay so in this example b strictly dominates d. For example b does not strictly dominate itself because b dominates itself but b does not strictly dominate itself. So b strictly dominates d. b also dominates d. b dominates b but b does not strictly dominate itself. So I'm going to also use S-dom with this crossed out S dom to say not strictly dominates, so B does not strictly dominate B, so not strictly dominates is yet another relation which is formed by complementing the strictly dominates relation and B does not strictly dominate B, similarly B does not strictly dominate C because B does not even dominate C, so it does not strictly dominate C and B because B does not dominate C okay, so this is strictly dominates is a relation that's been used in the definition of dominance frontiers, so I am defining it on this slide. Recall what is the dominance frontier of X? Y belongs to the dominant frontier of X if X does not strictly dominate Y but X dominates a predecessor P of Y. Okay, so we are going to see that in an example. The dominance frontier of a node X is a set of all nodes Y such that does not strictly dominate Y, so they are written X is dom naught Y and X but X dominates P for some predecessor P of Y. One way to think about this is that there exists a path from X to Y such that P is dominated by X, so if P is dominated by X then all the other nodes in this path must also be dominated by X because after all you know all paths to P must go through X and this is a path from X to P so all the nodes in the middle must also go through X. So all these nodes from X to P are dominated but there is this Y which is not strictly dominated. Y may be dominated but Y is not strictly dominated by X. So one way to think about it is that look at all the outgoing paths and if on any path if you identify encounter the first node that you don't strictly dominate that's in my dominance frontier that's why the word frontier is used because it's the first such node which X does not strictly dominate. So for example if there was another node Z, Z is also may perhaps not strictly dominated by X but Z is not in the dominance frontier of X because it doesn't have a predecessor that's dominated by X so that the frontier basically says it's the first such node on some path from X which is not strictly dominant. Okay so let's see this example so I'm going to use DOMF to represent DOMF of some node A let's say to represent the dominance frontier the set of all nodes in the dominance frontier of A. So if I look at the dominance frontier of A in this program then there's no node that is not strictly dominated by A there's only one node that's not strictly dominated by A and that's A itself but there's no predecessor to A the only predecessor to A is the entry which is which we don't consider here and even that A is not dominating anyway so the dominance frontier of A is actually the empty set because there is no such Y such that A does not strictly dominate Y except except A itself but the there's no predecessor of A which I dominate so A is not so that is not going to be part of the dominance frontier of A and so the dominance frontier of A is the empty set in this example. Now let's look at the dominance frontier of B let's look at all the paths so there's one path that's going to D and is D strictly dominated by B? Yes it is so if it is strictly dominated by B it is not in the dominance frontier of B because in our requirement is that should not be strictly dominated by B so D is not in the dominance frontier of B but if I look at F for example then F is not strictly dominated by B because there's an other path to F from entry which is this path from A C E G F and so F is not strictly dominated by B but a predecessor of F which is D is actually dominated by B and so F is in the dominance frontier of B similarly G is in the dominance frontier of G because B because there's a path to G from entry which does not go through B so it's G is not strictly dominated by B but a predecessor of G which is D is dominated by B but I say that there is one more node here which is in the dominance frontier of B and which one is it? Well if you look at B D and then this path from D to B now B is not strictly dominated by itself that's by the definition of strictly dominance but a predecessor of B which is D is dominated by B so in fact the third element in the dominance frontier of B is B itself because B does not strictly dominate B but B dominates D and D is a predecessor of B similarly now let's look at the dominance frontier of C is E in the dominance frontier of C? No because C actually dominates E strictly dominates E but G is in the dominance frontier of C because C does not strictly dominate G but C dominates a predecessor of G which is E Let's look at the dominance frontier of node D so node D has three outgoing edges one is going to B one is going to F one is going to G so does D strictly dominate F? No does D dominate a predecessor of F? Yes the predecessor of F is D so D dominates itself but D does not dominate strictly dominate F so F comes into the dominance frontier of D similarly G is part of the dominance frontier of D and D is a part of the dominance frontier of D because D does not strictly dominate B but D dominates a predecessor of D right D dominates itself which is a predecessor of D finally if I was to look at the dominance frontier of E then there are two outgoing edges from E one is going to G and one is going to E itself if I look at G, G is not strictly dominated by E but its predecessor E is dominated by E so we have G and also E itself is not strictly dominated by E but its predecessor E is dominated by E and so that also becomes a part of the dominance frontier of E so it's interesting to see how E is a part of the dominance frontier of E here you know the X for which we are computing the dominance frontier is E the Y which is part of the dominance frontier is also E and the P the predecessor of Y which is dominated by E is also E and so dominance frontier of E is E comma G in this example
