Title: Compiler Design Module 85 : Register Allocation
Video ID: 8jPpJkm6HVE
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

So now we are going to discuss register allocation. Recall that when we designed our intermediate representation for assembly language, we basically assumed that there are an unlimited number of temporaries. Now, that assumption was great because it simplified our code generation. If you recall, we had a function called cgen, where we had to worry about which registers are getting used. In fact, cgen was only able to use a few of the registers. And then there was igen, which was generating intermediate representation, where we were just generating temporaries at will. And so there, we were just assuming that there are an unlimited number of temporaries. And in fact, an SSA intermediate representation just here does not pay any heed to the number of available registers because it just kind of keeps versioning the same value and creates multiple registers for the same original register in the source code. So all these things actually simplifies code generation and optimizations because you can delay these decisions of what to allocate in the register and whatnot, because you can do a lot of optimization before you actually do the register allocation. In fact, you can also try to figure out what instructions to use, whether to do vectorization or not, without having to know whether this has been allocated to a register or not. But now, it's not something that we can completely get rid of. So at some point, we need to do register allocation. And so this is the final translation to assembly, and that gets slightly complicated because now we have to convert this program that we have optimized and transformed into a program that can actually execute on the machine, and the machine only has a small number of registers. And so we need to do this mapping from an potentially unlimited number of temporaries to a small number of registers. And so this phase of register allocation is just going to rename the temporaries to registers, such that the total number of registers used by the program are still within the bound, within the number of registers that are supported by the machine architecture. 

All right, so here's the problem statement. You rewrite the IR code, so we are not actually translating to assembly code, we're just rewriting the intermediate representation itself. So we are rewriting the IR code to use no more temporaries than there are machine registers. And if we can do that, then we have basically been able to find a register allocation. Okay, and it's possible that it's not always possible to do that. And if it's not possible to do that, we are going to spill some of the temporaries to memory, and we're going to later see how we can do that. All right, but at least let's understand what is the process, what is the way to think about this renaming of temporaries such that the total number of temporaries used by the program is less than equal to the number of machine registers. And here's one potential method. You assign multiple temporaries to one register, but without changing the program behavior. So let's say there are 10 temporaries that are being used, and let's say there are only eight registers in your machine, then if you can find mapping from the 10 temporaries to eight registers, such that some of the temporaries are mapping to the same register without changing program behavior, then that would be great. And this would be, of course, a many to one mapping typically, because typically you would expect the number of temporaries would be larger than the number of registers. If they're not larger than the number of registers, then there's no problem. Then register allocation is really easy, but we are really interested in the problem when the number of temporaries are bigger than the number of registers. Now, once again, I should point out that it's possible to think about solutions where you use different mappings at different points of the program. So example, you can say that T1 is mapped to register R1 at this point of the program, but at this point of the program, T1 is actually in memory, and then at a third point in the program, T1 is again mapped to some other register, R2, and so on. And so those are all part of the solution space, but the wider we make the solution space, the more complicated the solution would need to be to be able to capture all those points in the solution space. So we're going to make some simplifying assumptions here, and so one of the simplifying assumptions is that if a temporary is mapped to a register, then it is mapped to a register for the entire duration of the program, and that just drastically simplifies the way to think about register allocation, and we're going to later discuss how this thing happens in practice and whether these assumptions are actually meaningful in practice or are something else useful, right? So for now, we're going to assume that if a temporary has been mapped to a register, that mapping is valid for the entire duration of the program. 

Okay, so here is an example. So let's say I have a program which says A is assigned C plus D, E is assigned A plus B, F is assigned E minus one, okay? And let's assume that A and E are dead at the end of this program. So at this point here, A and E are not going to get used, all right? So A and E are dead. Now, in this program, let's say register allocate, and how many temporaries do you have in this program? Temporaries are variables, same thing. So how many variables do I have in the program? Six, A, B, C, D, E, F. And let's say my machine has four registers. So how will I map a program which has six temporaries to a program which has four registers? And we're going to use the simplifying assumption that I just stated, which is that the mappings from temporaries to registers are static in the sense that they're basically independent of the program location. The entire program, it will be the same mapping, whatever we choose, right? And first question is, is it even possible to map these temporaries to four registers? And if it is possible, what is the corresponding mapping, all right? 

Okay, so here is the solution. And in fact, it is possible. And the solution is the following, that notice that A and E are dead after use. So after, at the end of this program, A and E are dead. And so A, E, F can be assigned to R1, C can be assigned to R2, D can be assigned to R3, and B can be assigned to R4. Now, how do I know whether this is the correct mapping or not? So recall that we, I'm assuming that there are four registers, but then how am I sure that this is the correct mapping? Well, if I look at the program now, it says A is colon equal to C plus D. So I say R1 is colon equal to R2 plus R3, because A has been mapped to R1. And I say E is colon equal to A plus B. Now, both A and E are mapped to R1, but notice that, you know, I can use R1. So I can, you know, I can first, the program is supposed to first compute the RHS, which is A plus B, and that I can do using R1 plus R4, and then it is supposed to assign to E. And so then the computed value can be assigned to R1. And that's great, because now A is not going to get used after this. In other words, at this point here, A is dead. And because A is dead, it is okay to assign some other register to R1. Originally, A was assigned to R1, but now E can be assigned to R1. And so after you are done computing R1 plus R4, you will just assign it to R1. So it says you just change it to R1 colon equals R1 plus R4, okay? And this is okay. I mean, if you look at the logic, it's actually going to work out fine, right? In R1, we have R2 plus R3. And now, after the second statement, it is R2 plus R3 plus R4. And that's exactly equal to C plus D plus B. And that's what we were looking for. And then finally we have F is colon equal to E minus one. And once again, E is dead at this point, right? And so how do I say that? I say R1 is colon equal to R1 minus one. Sorry, I had a typo. It should be minus one. So I say R1 is colon equal to R1 minus one. So once again, the value of E is available in R1. So I can use that while computing the RHS. And I say E minus one just becomes R1 minus one. And now after this computation is done, then E is not useful. So I can just store it as global R1 with the value of F. And at this point, it is F that is mapped to R1. So that's basically the idea. And this actually, it's almost like D SSA-ing the IR. When we were doing SSA, we were basically just creating more temporaries for every different variable. Now we are basically, for variables that can be actually mapped to the same variable, we are trying to kind of do that. And so in a way, maybe A, E, and F were just different versions of the same value. And now we are kind of de-versioning them and creating a single value for all of them because that, in this case, is represented by R1. So that's an example. 

And what is the insight that we gain from this example? The insight is that A, E, and F could map to the same register because at no program point, at no program point, all of them are live simultaneously. So these are the keywords. At no program point, live simultaneously. And that's true because at this point here, A is live, but E is not live. E is not even present, and F is not present. At this point, E is live. So here, A is live. Here, E is live, but A and F are not live. And here, F is live, but A and E are not live. And so at no program point, any two of them are live. So actually, it's not necessarily all of them need to be live, but even no two of them are live simultaneously. So, for example, A and E are not live simultaneously at any program point. Or E and F are not live at any program point in this program, okay? So that's a property that we have used to be able to allocate them simultaneously. 

And let's try to generalize that. So we can say that temporary T1 and T2 can share the same register if at any program point, at most one of T1 or T2 is live, right? So for any pair of temporaries, we can check whether they can share a register or not, whether they can be mapped to the same register or not in our many-to-one mapping. Recall that in our simplified assumption, we're just assuming that there's a many. We have to figure out a many-to-one mapping from the temporaries to the registers. And we say that two temporaries can map to the same register if at most one of T1 or T2 is live at any program point. So this is our quantification over all possible program points. But if T1 and T2 are live simultaneously at any program point, then they cannot share a register, right? So that is the corollary of our first statement. Another way of saying that is that if T1 and T2 are live simultaneously, they cannot share a register. So once again, if T1 and T2 are not live at any program point, then they can be mapped to the same register. Conversely, if T1 and T2 are live at any program point or at any, you know, if there exists a program point where they are two live simultaneously, then they cannot share a register. 

So here's an example. Let's say this is a program. It has control flow. It has a loop. It says A is colon equal to B plus C. D is colon equal to minus A. I'm omitting some statements, but let's say there's this control flow structure. And then let's say at the end of the program here, we assume that B is live, right? So I haven't drawn the whole program, but maybe at these points, B is live. Now, what am I going to do? I'm going to execute our liveness analysis that we have already discussed to figure out what are the live variables at every program point, 

and this would be our solution. So these are the live temporaries at every program point. So for example, at this particular program point, the live variables are B, C, and F. How come? Well, B is live because it's live at these edges, and C and F are live at the loop edge because C is getting used here, F is getting used here, and so we can figure out that both of them are live. All right, and so that's good. And similarly, we can do a backward data flow analysis. I'm not showing the execution of the backward data flow analysis, but if we do the backward data flow analysis, then the fixed point solution is going to be that B, C, and F are live here, A, C, and F live here, and so on. And so this is the entire solution, right? So all these kind of things in the purple pen are basically variables that are live at every program point. Now, based on this, what can we say? What are the pairs of variables that are not live simultaneously at any program point? So for example, notice that A and E are not live simultaneously anywhere, all right? In fact, A and D are also not live simultaneously. And so we can potentially look at every pair of variables and see which of them are not live simultaneously at any program point. 

And here is what I could figure out. Temporaries A and D, A and D, A and D, and in fact, B and D are also not live simultaneously, right? So how do I figure this out? I just need to go through each of the program points and see what is the solution and see what are the variables that are live, right? So we're going to see an algorithm on how to do this. So we're going to see how to do this efficiently. But now, if we know that these are the temporaries that are not live simultaneously at any program point, that also means that these are the temporaries that may share a resistor. So it is okay to, for example, map A and B to the same resistor, all right? It is also okay to map A and D to the same resistor. And in fact, it is also possible to map B and D to the same resistor. So in fact, from these three, we can say that A and D can be mapped to the same resistor. But then there is A and E that can also be mapped to the same resistor, but E and D cannot be mapped to the same resistor because we don't have, E and D are actually occurring together, for example, here. And so while A and D can be mapped to the same resistor, A, E, and D cannot simultaneously be mapped to the same resistor. So you have to make a choice in your algorithm. Either you map A and E to the same resistor or you map A and D to the same, or map a same resistor, right? But you cannot map A, D, and E simultaneously to the same resistor, and that would be wrong. So this is the kind of solution that we are looking for. 

And here is a way to arrive at the solution. The idea is we'll construct an undirected graph where every node is one temporary variable. So let's say A, B, C, D, E, F. And there's an edge between a temporary T1 and T2 if they are simultaneously live at some program point. So even if there is some program point, one program point, where T1 and T2 are simultaneously live in this undirected graph, I'm going to draw an edge, an undirected edge between T1 and T2, right? And so there's nodes and there are edges. A node for each temporary and an edge between T1 and T2 if they are simultaneously live at some program point. So let's try to do this for the example that we just discussed. Before we do that, this kind of undirected graph is called a register interference graph, or RIG for short. And the idea is that if I have a RIG, if I have a register interference graph, then T1 and T2 can be allocated to the same register if no edge is present between them, right? So if there's no edge between T1 and T2, that basically means that they were not live at any program point, because we draw an edge if they are live at some program point. So if there is no edge, then basically means they're not live at any, simultaneously at any program point. And that means that they can be given the same register, same machine register. 

So for example, this is the register interference graph for the example program that we saw. So first of all, I just drew all the nodes, A, B, C, D, E, F are the nodes of my graph. Then I look at all the program points. For example, I have B, C, F. So I draw edges from B to F, B to C, and C to F, right? So all these three edges are because of, let's say this particular program point. Then we have ACF. So once again, I have A to C, and A to F, and C to F. Then I have CDF. So C to D, C to F, and D to F, right? So any pairwise, any pair of temporary that has the same simultaneously live, we need to draw in it. So it's a pairwise reasoning that we are doing here, right? CDEF, so we already did CDF, so maybe now we have to worry about E. So E to C, E to D, E to F. Again, CDEF, we have done this before. BCEF, so B to E, B to C, B to F, and C to F. BCF, already done this. CF, already done this. CE, CE also we have already done. CF we have already done because of CDEF, and that's it. And so that's our resistor interference graph, or RIG. And notice that, once again, nodes that are not connected by an edge can be assigned the same resistor. So for example, A and B can be assigned the same resistor. A and D can be assigned the same resistor. But A and F cannot be assigned the same resistor. And we are interested in finding out a solution such that we use the minimum number of resistors, or at least the number of resistors that we use is going to be less than the available number of resistors that we have in our machine. 

And so, first of all, the RIG, the resistor interference graph, exactly extracts the information required to characterize the legal resistor assignments, and gives us a global picture, because now we don't have to worry about at what program point and so on. We just kind of globally extracted this graph, which summarizes the information at all program points in the program. 

And then we basically use this, and the problem now reduces, the problem of resistor allocation now reduces to the problem of graph coloring. So this is a well-known problem in theoretical computer science. A coloring of a graph is an assignment of colors to nodes, such that nodes connected by an edge have different colors. So graph coloring is a problem for undirected graphs, first of all. And we say a coloring of an undirected graph is an assignment of colors to nodes. So for every node is given a color. Think of that, I just want to color every node. But there is a constraint that nodes connected by an edge must have different colors. And that's exactly what we are looking for. So for example, you can say A is given a color, and B is given a color. Because A and B are not connected by an edge, they can have the same color. But the color that F has should be different from the color that A has, because they are connected by an edge. So we just kind of, for us, we are one way to think about this, and at least in theoretical computer science, the way they think about this is coloring of nodes. And the constraints are exactly what we are looking for in our register allocation problem. And so we say a graph is key colorable if it has a coloring with K colors. So is it possible, is it even possible to color this graph in K colors? So of course, if the graph has N nodes, then it should be always possible to cover it, color it with N different colors. I mean, that's easy. But is it possible to now color it in N minus one colors? Is it possible to color it in N by two colors? Is it possible to color it in some arbitrary number K colors? And so that is a problem. And the graph is K colorable if it has a coloring with K colors. And so that's what this problem kind of reduces to. But then this problem is not an easy problem. So it's an NP-hard problem. What is the, is a graph K colorable? That's unfortunately an NP-hard problem. But there are some solutions to kind of solve these problems, maybe not the optimal solution, but close to optimal solutions and things like that. And I'm going to discuss one possible algorithm to do graph coloring. And the point is that for us, colors are nothing but machine registers. So when I say that, let's say I color A with some register color, I color the node A. That basically means I assign the node corresponding to the color to node A, right? Or temporary A, right? So there's a one-to-one mapping between temporaries and nodes, and colors and machine registers. And K here is going to be the number of machine registers. So what I'm really interested in knowing is that is it possible to color this node with K colors, where K is the number of registers I have in my machine. And if so, what is that coloring? And once I have that coloring, then it's easy. I just kind of rewrite my IRs with that assignment of nodes to colors or temporaries to machine registers, just like we did in our example. Just so you know, this graph is four-colorable here, but it is not three-colorable, all right? So it is possible to color this graph in four colors, but it's not possible to color this graph in three colors. This is a small example, so it's possible to solve this, but for larger graphs, it would become intractable to solve this because the problem is NP-hard. Next time, we're going to look at an algorithm to try to solve this in a heuristic way.
