Title: Compiler Design Module 17 : Recursive Descent Parsing Introduction
Video ID: YioXoN9iO7w
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

So today we're going to study our first parsing algorithm. So far we have discussed what is a context-free grammar and what does it mean for a sequence of tokens to be accepted by that context-free grammar or not. Today we're going to discuss an algorithm that is going to actually identify whether a string can be accepted by a context-free grammar or not. Recall that a string or a sequence of tokens is accepted by context-free grammar. If there exists a derivation from the start symbol to that sequence of tokens. So this algorithm is supposed to identify whether such a derivation exists or not. And if there exists such a derivation, then it's supposed to identify the parse tree or the derivation tree associated with that derivation. Okay, so this algorithm is called the recursive descent parsing algorithm, also known as the top-down parsing algorithm, all right? And it is called so because in this algorithm, the parse tree is constructed from the top. So let's say the start symbol is S. So initially the parse tree is formed only by the single node S. And then we try to identify what are all the productions of S, and then choose the appropriate production and so on. And we keep doing this recursively. So we construct the parse tree top-down. So we start from the top and then construct it top-down. Also, we observe the inputs left to right while identifying what to choose, right? So the stream of tokens can be either read right to left or left to right or middle outwards or whatever. But this algorithm reads tokens left to right. Typically, most parsing algorithms read tokens left to right because that is also the way humans typically read sentences in most languages, especially English. And so the parsing algorithm also reads tokens left to right. Okay. So here's an example. Let's say the tokens are T2, T5, T6, T8, T9. So this is just a linear sequence of tokens. And this is probably the parse tree that may come out of this linear sequence of tokens. T2 is associated with the subtree formed by all the other four tokens. And for the other four tokens, maybe, you know, there are two tokens on the left subtree and the two tokens on the right subtree. So in general, the parse tree could be formed by, there could be multiple parse trees for the same sequence of tokens. That would be an ambiguous grammar. But for a non-ambiguous grammar, there is probably, if the sentence is accepted by that grammar, then there should be a unique parse tree. And this algorithm is supposed to find that parse tree. In this example, I just show an example parse tree that may have been generated for a given grammar. So I'm not showing the grammar in this example. Now, let's take an example to see how, to informally see how recursive descent parsing works. So let's say that you have a grammar. This is a grammar that you've already seen, grammar of arithmetic expressions with plus and star, such that star has higher precedence than plus. So in this grammar, there are two non-terminals. The top level non-terminal is E, which is also the start symbol. So E could either produce a term, T, or it could be a term plus another expression, E. So E stands for an expression. And T, the term, could be either a leaf node, which is an integer, or it could be an int star T, so another integer multiplied by the rest of the term. So it could be int star, int star something. Or even E, which is parenthesized, would be considered a term, okay? All right, so this is a grammar that we've already seen. It is a grammar that constructs expressions consisting of plus and star, giving higher precedence to associating star before associating plus. However, if there are parentheses, then parentheses are giving the highest preference in this example. All right, so to take this example further, let's say that I have this sequence of tokens. In this case, just three tokens. Open parentheses, five, in the integer five, and then the close parentheses. Now, if I try to parse this, I'm just going to try and run the algorithm, the recursive descent algorithm, to give you a flavor of how it works before introducing it more formally. So first of all, the start symbol is E. So I'm going to start with E. So let's say I take another pen here. So let's say I start with E. And now I have two choices. So the way it works is that I will start with E and try rules in order. So I'm going, in this case, there are two rules. Either E could produce T or E could produce T plus E. So I try the rules in order. So I'm going to first try T and then I'm going to try T plus E, all right? And if I ever find some incompatible terminals, so as long as I have only non-terminals, it's not clear whether I'm going on the right path or not. So maybe I chose the wrong production to start with. So maybe the right production to start with was T plus E, but I initially chose T. And later on, I'm going to find that I'm not able to accept the sentence using the chosen production, in which case I should backtrack. So how am I going to find out whether I made the wrong choice? Well, whenever we find an incompatible terminal, we know that we are on the wrong path and we should backtrack and try something else, okay? We cannot backtrack just based on non-terminals because non-terminals still need to be expanded and we don't know what they may get expanded to. But if we ever hit a terminal and that terminal is incompatible with whatever is the next token in the sentence that we are parsing, then we can always say that we are on the wrong track and we go back and backtrack and try the other option. All right, so let's run this example on this input. So I'm going to start with, let's say E. And the first thing I'm going to try is E goes to T, okay? Now, because that's the first production, I could have also tried T plus E, but that's the second production, so I'm going to try that later, if needed. So if I am able to parse using T, then I'm already done. But if I'm not able to parse through this production, then I'm going to have to try the other production. Now, how does T behave? So T could either go to int, that's the first production in this case, but if it goes to int, the first terminal in my sentence is an open parenthesis, but the first terminal in this production is an int and these are incompatible. And so I'm going to say that this is incompatible and so I'm backtrack. So when I backtrack, I'm going to try the other option for T, which is int star T. Now, once again, in this production, the first terminal that is produced is an int, whereas the first terminal that was present in our sentence is an open parenthesis. And so once again, this is incompatible, right? So I'm going to cross this out as well. Finally, I'm going to say, try the third one, which is open parenthesis E, closed parenthesis. And in this case, the first token, the open parenthesis, matches with the first token of a sentence, so that's great. The second symbol here is a non-terminal, so we can't say anything about it and so we kind of are still okay, right? So we don't look beyond the non-terminal because we don't know how much the non-terminal is going to produce, but at least till the first non-terminal, things are consistent with the sentence. So we move on. And so we are going to say, okay, what does E produce? So once again, there are two options for E, either E could produce T or E could produce T plus E, right? And we're going to try them in order. So the first thing we're going to try is T. And for T, I'm going to try the same things in order. So what's the first production for T? That's an int. And at this point, I have three terminals and no non-terminal. And it turns out that the three terminals are completely consistent with the three terminals of the original sentence, which was also open parenthesis and closed parenthesis. And so this set of terminals is all right, okay? So this is good. And we are done with our parsing. We found two results. One, that this sentence is a valid sentence in this grammar, which means that there exists a derivation from E to the sentence. And second, we also know the parse tree. What is the parse tree? This is exactly the backtracking tree, the paths taken by the backtracking tree to arrive at this sentence.
