Title: Compiler Design Module 147 : More on Solving Space Partitioning Constraints
Video ID: T4LvxAmglvE
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

So let's look at the process of solving space partition constraints in a bit more detail. So recall that for one pair of accesses with the data dependency, we get some kind of relation which says, capital C1 is the first set of columns, minus capital C2 is the second set of columns, C1 minus C2 is the last column, single column. This is small c1 minus small c2, multiplied with the matrix U, and this U is coming from Gaussian elimination of basically by first representing I1, I2, 1 as some UT through Gaussian elimination to reduce the degrees of freedom. So whatever is the U which is a multiplier of T, which is the set of free variables is basically coming here. Basically, we said that because this must hold for every T, we basically are interested in finding the solutions for the coefficient being equal to zero, and the coefficient is this whole thing. So that's what our space partitioning constraints look like. I should point out that for another pair, we may get another set of constraints, and this time instead of capital U, you may get some other matrix, let's call it U2, and similarly, you could get another matrix U3 and so on, and you could collect all these constraints. Notice that in these constraints, the unknowns are capital C1 minus capital C2, small c1, small c2. Those are the unknowns. And so you could collect all these unknowns and represent them as the following. Some matrix A, which is made up of all constants, and then you basically say capital C1, capital C2, small c1, small c2. I should point out that capital C1, capital C2, small c1, small c2 represent one row of their corresponding matrices or vectors. We're going to see an example. So for example, if capital C1 had, capital C1 represents the mapping for some loopness depth i, j, then capital C1 would have two elements. One for C1, one which is for i, i's coefficient, and then there'll be C1, too, which is j's coefficient, and so on. Similarly, capital C2 would have two coefficients, or two values. One is capital C2, one and C2, two for i and j respectively. And similarly, small c1 would be basically, depending on how many, so small c1 would basically represent single value because it's just an additive constant. Also, the other thing I want to point out especially is that I'm talking about one row. So actually, the capital C1, capital C2 are supposed to be matrices, but we're just looking at the first row, and we're basically saying what should be the constraint on the first row. And eventually, if you recall, basically we're going to find out the maximum rank of the null space, and so that's going to give me different rows, different possible solutions for these capital C1 and capital C2, and that's how we're going to basically represent as matrices and not a single row or multiple rows. We're going to see an example and that will make it even clearer. So let's look at this example. And this example is very similar to the example that we've been using earlier, except that I have changed the program a little. Let's look at the program for i equals one to 100, for j equals one to 100, xij plus equals yij. So this is completely data independent. But then I have yij plus one plus equals zij. And so now there's a clear data dependency between these two statements, right? And so basically I want to say that whenever there's a data dependency, it should so happen that they're basically mapping to the same processor. And so in this case, there are two statements. Let's say this is S1 and let's say this is S2, and the two statements have corresponding mapping functions. Let's say capital C1, small c1 for S1, and then capital C2, small c2 for S2. So if I kind of write down the space partitioning constraints, I want to say for all pairs of accesses, i comma j and i prime comma j prime, such that the i comma j and i prime comma j prime belong to the polyhedron of the iteration space. Whenever the two accesses access the same location, so which means whenever y i comma j equals y i prime comma j prime plus one. In other words, whenever i equals i prime and j equals j prime plus one, because that's when the two accesses are going to access the same location, then it should be true that S1 and S2 map to the same processor. In other words, capital C1 into ij plus small c1 should equal capital C2 into i prime j prime plus small c2. And notice that here I have expanded capital C1 into two scalar values, capital C11 and capital C12. Similarly, capital C21 and capital C22. And so I want to solve these space partitioning constraints and we already know what's the first step here. The first step is to basically do Gaussian elimination based on the if clause. And so in the if clause, we know i prime equals i, so I can just replace i prime with i everywhere and I can replace j prime with j minus one or something like that. Actually, in this case, I have actually replaced it with j plus one. So let me just change my example a little bit so that it agrees with the working that I have done. So let's assume that this was j minus one and so then j prime becomes j plus one, all right? And so these are my new kind of constraints and in these constraints, basically I have two free variables, ij, right? And then all these unknowns which are C21, C11, C12, C22, and then small c1 and small c2. Once again, the free variable, i and j are free variables, which means that this constraint should hold for all possible values of i and j. Actually, they need to hold only for this range of i and j, but we're going to over approximate by saying, it should hold for all possible values of i and j. And when we say it should hold for all possible values of i and j, how do we solve for it? We basically bring it to the form ut equals zero, where t is basically i and j and then basically set u to be zero. So this is what my constraint is going to look like. I'm going to say, so if I just kind of rewrite this, I'm going to get C11. So if I kind of bring all the RHS into LHS and collect all the coefficients of let's say i, then I get C11 minus C21. That's the coefficient of i. Similarly, the coefficient of j is C12 minus C22. So that's the coefficient of j. And then the constant value or the coefficient of one here, which is, I should have written one here, is basically small c1 minus capital C22 minus small c2. And this should hold for all possible values of i and j. And basically for it to hold for all possible values of i and j, I want to say, so before I even talk about that, this is my T and this is my capital C1 minus capital C2, small c1 minus small c2 into u. So this whole thing is basically representing the multiplication of the two matrices. And I want to say that, you know, and first of all, this is only for a single pair of accesses. So we collect more such constraints for more pairs of accesses. And eventually what we really have is basically constraints on the unknowns, which are capital C11, capital C21, and so on. And so we collect all those constraints and we basically get a constraint which looks like the following, which says capital C11, capital C12, capital C21, capital C22, small c1, small c2. This forms our x. And these are the multipliers of x which represent all the different constraints. So for example, the first constraints, in my example, let's assume that this was the only constraint. There could have been more pairs of accesses which could have had data dependencies. But recall that in our example, there was only one pair of accesses that had a data dependency. So in our example, we want to say that C11 minus C21 equals zero. And so that's our first row. Now, basically our first row is one, zero, minus one, zero, zero, zero. So one into C11 plus zero, minus C21 and everything else is zero. So that basically means C11 minus C21 equals zero. Similarly, the second row encodes the second constraint, which is C12 minus C22 equals zero. So if you look at this, the zero plus C12 minus C22 plus zero equals zero. That's basically saying that C12 minus C22 equals zero. And the third row is saying that small c1 minus capital C22. So this is minus capital C22 plus small c1 minus small c2 equals zero. And so this basically is the ax equals zero form that we have been talking about in our previous module. Once we bring it into this ax equals zero form, the next kind of interesting thing to note basically use here is that these small c1 and small c2 are actually not that important. I mean, what we were interested in is maximizing the rank of these values, capital C11, capital C12, capital C21 and capital C22. We're interested in maximizing the rank of these, which basically means as many possible values that we can potentially have, we want to have for these coefficients. And the small c1s can just follow from there. We really don't care about small c1s. So the next step is to basically convert this constraint into a constraint that only relates the first four variables, which are the capital Cs and kind of removes the small c's from the equation. So how do you do that in general? Well, so we are only interested in the constraints between the capital Cs and we really don't care about the small c's to basically be able to maximize the rank of the capital Cs. And so how do you do that in general? There could be many methods. Here's one simple method. You choose the order so that capital Cs are at the bottom and the small c's are at the top. That's step number one. And then you bring the resulting A. So when you change the order of the variables, you also change the order of the columns in capital A to basically preserve the meaning of the equation. And then you bring the capital A into row reduced echelon form. And recall that in the row reduced echelon form, you have a lower triangular matrix, which is all zeros. And then you have an upper triangular matrix, which has potentially non-zero values and the diagonal, or basically all these kinds of leading elements in each row are basically ones. And so once you bring it in this form, if you look at this particular quadrant of this row reduced echelon form, this encodes the constraints on capital Cs and completely ignores small c's altogether. So if there were, for example, transitive constraints between one capital C, another small c and another capital C, and because of that, there was a transitive constraint that's going to get handled by this conversion to row reduced echelon form. And so once we solve for all the capital Cs, it's easy to get the small c's from there because notice that in this constraint, I mean, if I just put this whole thing to zero, once I know the capital Cs, then I can just get small c two in terms of the capital Cs. And similarly, I can get small c one in terms of the capital Cs and so on. All right, so that's basically the idea. I mean, so from there, from ax equals zero, we get to a prime, x prime equals zero, where x prime is basically only the capital Cs and ignore the small c's. So in our particular example, I mean, we don't even need to do all the row reduced echelon form, et cetera. It's already in a form where it's easy to see that the last row is basically relating the small c's and it's only the first two rows, the first four columns of the first two rows that are relating the capital Cs. And so these eight elements, which have four columns and two rows form our a prime. And so the new kind of a prime, x prime equals zero constraints looks like this. One, zero, minus one, zero, that's our first row. Zero, one, zero, minus one, that's our second row. And multiplier, the unknowns are capital C one, capital C one, two, capital C two, one, and capital C two, two. And now we want to maximize. So this is my a prime, x equals zero. And I want to maximize the rank of the null space of a prime, because I want to maximize the rank of the solution space for this particular equation. And so the maximizing of rank of the solution space basically means what are the possible, all the possible values for which this constraint holds. And that would basically mean, let's maximize the null space of a prime. And so if I look at the, if I try to identify the null space of a prime and its basis vectors, and I could choose any basis vectors, it doesn't really matter as long as it represents the same base null space. Then I'm going to find that in this particular case, the null space is one, zero, one, zero, for C one, one, C one, two, C two, one, C two, two respectively, and zero, one, zero, one, again for the same set of vectors. So how do I know that this is a null space? Well, you can just kind of multiply this matrix with this matrix, this matrix and you would basically get end up with zero. So you look at any vector. So let's say I multiply the first row with the first column, I'm going to get zero because one into one plus zero into zero plus minus one into one. So that's one plus zero into zero. So that's one minus one, that's zero. Similarly, if I multiply the first row with the second column, I'm again going to get a zero. If I multiply the second row with the first column, I'm again going to get a zero. And if I multiply the second row with the second column, I'm all again going to get a zero. In fact, if I take any linear combination of this, for example, if I took, for example, another null space, which was let's say one, zero, one, zero, but the second one was just an addition of the first row and the second row and get one, one, one, one. Even this would have been a set, valid set of basis vectors. It doesn't really matter what basis vectors you pick. Irrespective of the basis vectors you pick, the solution you're going to get has going to have the exact similar properties. So let's for now assume that we are going to go with this solution for my null space of A prime. And so these are basically going to form my solution for capital C's. So basically C one, one can, so these are the values for C one, one, possible values of C one, one. These are the two possible values for C one, two. These are the two possible values for C two, one. And these are the two possible values for C two, two. And so from here, we know because there are two possible values or two columns for this null space in this form, then rank of null of A prime is actually two. In the example that we had discussed previously, which had two data dependent constraints, the rank of the resulting solution was actually one. In this example, the rank is actually two. So how do I use this null space solution to basically finally generate a mapping from the iteration space to the processor space? Because the rank of the solution is two, basically that means that we are going to get a two dimensional processor space. And we now need a function from the two dimensional iteration space to the two dimensional processor space. Finally, we need to also kind of find the values for small C one and small C two. Now that we have identified the maximum rank solution for the capital C's and identified what are the corresponding rows going to be corresponding to basis vectors. Now we can now find out what are the corresponding small C's and small C one and small C two by using the original capital A. Recall in the original capital A, if you use the row reduced echelon form, then basically have the top two rows are basically telling us the values of small C one and small C two in terms of the other variables. So in this case, basically if you recall, it was basically saying that C one one minus C two two is equal to minus C one minus C, sorry small C one minus small C two is equal to minus C two two. And so that's basically going to be zero for the first row or for the first column and minus one for the second column because capital C two two is zero. So minus of zero is just zero. And here it is one and so minus of one is minus one. And without loss of generality, we can set one of the constants to zero because one of the constants can just be set to zero. It doesn't matter because after all, just when we shift the processor space, linearly and it doesn't really change the solution. And so that basically means that small C one is always zero and small C two is zero and one because that's how we're going to get C one minus C two to be zero and minus one. All right, so with that, we are ready to basically identify our fine functions which map iteration space to processor space. So P one equals C one one, C one two, I J plus C one. And C one one recall we started with a single row when we were kind of trying to solve the AX equals zero but now we have realized that C one one, C one two, solution for C one one, C one two is a rank two solution. So this becomes a two row matrix. And in this case, we just take the first two rows of this null space and basically because C one one can take two values. So it becomes one zero. So that comes here one zero and then zero one that comes here zero one for C one two. Right, so this zero goes here and this one goes here, for example. And so that's P one plus small c one, small c one. Small c one we are assuming to be zero. So that's just zero zero. All right, so that's the mapping function for S one. Similarly, what's the mapping function for S two? Once again, I say C two one, C two two, I J plus small c two. And so once again, C two one has values one and zero. So that comes here. And C two two has value zero and one. And that comes as a second column and that gets multiplied with I J and plus what do I want here is C two. So C two is zero for the first row, which is zero here. And then C two is one for the second row and that comes here. And so this is basically our final solution for our mapping function from the iteration space, I J to the processor space P one. And in the second case, it's P two. And notice that P one and P two are both basically two dimensional spaces because we have a rank two solution for our capital C's. All right, finally, I'm going to leave you with an interesting fact. What is the maximum rank solution for capital C's that you can get? In other words, what is the maximum rank of the null space of A prime that we had constructed? And I claim that rank of null of A prime can never be greater than D. It has to be less than equal to D where D is the depth of the iteration space, maximum depth of the iteration space, which is in two in our example, I and J, right? So it can be shown that the space, the rank of the maximum rank that you get from this method that we have applied for the capital C's matrix for any capital C, whether it's for S one or S two doesn't matter, but it's capital C one or capital C two doesn't matter. The rank will never be greater than D where D is the loop nest depth. I'm not going to discuss the reason for this. I'm going to leave this as a homework exercise for you to figure out. Just think about what could be, just try to construct a matrix which is greater than rank D and identify what would be the corresponding space partitioning constraints and you would find that it's just not possible and from there, the proof will follow.
