Title: Compiler Design Module 170 : Immediate vs  Deferred UB
Video ID: 0YSXgoWKYxs
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

So, now we have discussed the poison value and its associated operational semantics and also the motivation for the use of poison value. Today I am going to introduce another terminology that is used for this kind of undefined behavior, weak form of undefined behavior such as poison values and that is called deferred undefined behavior versus immediate undefined behavior. So, the undefined behavior that we had studied originally which is the undefined behavior, the kind of undefined behavior that is present in the C programming language for example, we are going to call that the immediate undefined behavior or immediate undefined behavior. And we are going to introduce a new term called deferred UB and I am going to in this module say what does deferred UB mean and why it is called so. So, let us take this example int x equals int max plus 1. Now, this is an example where int max plus 1 will cause signed integer overflow and because it will cause signed integer overflow in the C programming language it will trigger undefined behavior and I am going to call that immediate UB. So, it is immediately going to trigger the undefined behavior which means from here on the program gets allowed to do anything because it has done something illegal, the machine does not know what to do here and the machine can behave any which way it likes. And that is basically a feature that for error conditions used for optimization, we have discussed this in a lot of detail earlier. And then we looked at an IR like LLVM which uses a Poisson value to represent the result of such computation and this transfers the Poisson value to the destination variable x. I should also point out that if I take another example let us say I do 2 divide by 0 x you know let us say y equals 2 divide by 0, then in this case it will be immediate UB in both cases, so right even for LLVM this would result in immediate UB. So, we have selectively you know chosen some operations where we are going to trigger immediate UB and some operations where we are going to generate a Poisson value. Further we define the operational semantics of the Poisson value, for example one of the important characteristics is the Poisson value propagates. So for example if x is a Poisson value then I can add it to anything or do any other operation on it and I can end up with a Poisson value again. So you know once again I get a Poisson value in the case of C this statement may or may not execute at all because I mean C has already triggered UB but in the case of LLVM we have just created a Poisson value we are still obliged the abstract machine still obliged to execute the next instruction. So in the case of C I just use a dash operator it's not really applicable you can do the C abstract machine can do anything it likes but the LLVM abstract machine will generate a Poisson value for this particular program into y and then let's say I do some kind of dangerous operation on y for example I could divide by y or I could branch on y and in which case even LLVM now triggers immediate UB. So the idea is that you know you generate a Poisson value but as long as the Poisson value is not being used in some critical operations or what I'm going to call dangerous operations like branch or the denominator of a division then it just kind of keeps propagating the Poisson value and the program keeps executing but as long as soon as it's used in some kind of dangerous operation like a memory used as a memory address or as a branch condition then I'm going to trigger immediate UB and so what has really happened is that the Poisson value has allowed the deferring of the UB. The UB that was supposed to be triggered originally in the C program at the first statement itself has been deferred all the way to the use of the Poisson value in some dangerous operation and so Poisson value allows deferring of UB and if the Poisson value is never used in a dangerous operation we have been able to avoid the UB altogether right and that is where the power of the Poisson value comes from or the advantage of the Poisson value comes from. If the Poisson value is not used in a dangerous operation then you know we'd never trigger UB and this allows you know many common transformations especially the ones that involve hoisting and loop invariant core motion is a very prototypical example of a transformation that uses hoisting and because of this behavior of Poisson values which basically defers immediate UB as shown in this example Poisson values are I'm also going to say that Poisson values are a form of deferred UB so I'm introducing a new terminology immediate UB versus deferred UB Poisson values basically implement a form of deferred UB which is also weaker form of UB than immediate UB and and so this terminology helps us you know understand the the motivation and the operations of you know these weaker forms of UB like Poisson values because they by using the word deferred you're basically explicitly saying what's really happening in this particular case.
