Title: Compiler Design Module 2 : Evolution of Compilers
Video ID: MfStbwbAwH8
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

Okay, great. So we're going to talk about the timeline of compilers and why worry about compilers. So there are two parts to today's discussion. One is why bother studying about compilers? Why are compilers important in the future? And we'll also touch a little bit upon the past because the past will give us some understanding and learning about how things have evolved and also give some perspective on how they are likely to evolve in future. Okay, so why study compilers? So I think the answer lies in two major technology trends related to the computer industry. One is that the Moore's law is running out of steam. What is the Moore's law? Well, if you're not familiar with it, we're going to discuss that in more detail in the next slides. And the other major technology trend is that programs are becoming more complex and so programming language abstractions are becoming higher level. So if you want to write complex programs, you don't want to write them in low level languages, just like you didn't want to write programs in assembly language. Now, if your programs are even more complex than what they used to be 10 years ago, then you don't want to write them in the same language that you're writing simpler programs. And so programming languages keep becoming higher level. And so the gap between the abstractions in the programming language and the hardware keeps increasing and the compilers need to play a bigger and bigger role. All right, so what's the Moore's law? Well, the Moore's law is not a law, but it was a prediction made by Gordon Moore who was a co-founder of Intel and actually another company called Fairchild Semiconductors. He made this prediction in 1965. He said, number of integrated components will double every year for at least the next decade. So based on what he saw in 1965, is that he made a prediction for the next 10 years the number of integrated components will double every year. Now, this is a very bold prediction because you're basically predicting an exponential growth in the number of integrated components in a processing chip. And you're saying that it will double every year for at least the next decade. And surprisingly, it came true. And so in 1975, this was revised to double every two years. And even that has held true for a long, long time, almost 30, 40 years. And for a bold prediction like this, which predicts an exponential amount of growth to hold for a long period like 30, 40 years is pretty phenomenal. And that's why it's also colloquially known as the Moore's law. In 2015, this was revised to double every 2.5 years. In any case, there are some kind of parallel predictions that were made, which are also called laws, which were related to the speed of CPU. And for example, people predicted that the speed of a processing unit, a CPU, will increase exponentially starting 1965, let's say. And it actually did increase exponentially for a long time, but it actually saturated into thousands. And so we can't go beyond a certain amount of frequency at which we can run our computers. Similarly, the Moore's law is also pretty much saturating because if you're doubling the number of integrated components or transistors on your computing substrate, then you're also making them smaller and smaller and smaller, but there are physical limits to how small you can make things. All right, so what are these physical limits to how small you can make things or physical limits to transistor scaling? Well, there are some physical limits that are beyond the scope of this course, but it's good to know. I mean, things like source-to-drain current leakage, limited gate material, limited options for the transistor material, like silicon. So it's safe to assume for our purposes that just like all exponentials, this exponential will also come to an end. And if we assume that this exponential will come to an end, it basically means that architectures are likely to evolve in a different way than what they did for so many years. In fact, we already saw this evolution change in the 2000s. Till the computers were just increasing in their frequency, in their speed, we were just running with a single processor, but as soon as the architects realized that they can no longer increase the frequency of a CPU, they started packing more and more cores or logical CPUs onto a single physical CPU. And that gave rise to multi-core computing as we know it today. So similar things are likely to happen at a much faster pace in the coming future, actually. So yeah, so this is an example. Architectural innovations are necessitated because the physical hardware, the physics is not going to support us forever. And we already see an example that single cores, we moved from single core CPU to multi-core CPU. Also, there has been a flurry of activity in the instruction set architecture design. For example, there are more single instruction multiple data instruction sets in common CPUs like Intel and ARM. There are also special custom processing elements like GPUs that only export, that only implement single instruction multiple data abstractions. And this is particularly useful for graphics and that's why this kind of experiments were grew in the GPU space. Although these GPUs are not just used today for graphics but also used for general purpose computation. There are more complex instruction sets that have been added over the last 10, 15, 20 years. For example, x86, 64 SSE and ARM SVE scalable vector extensions are examples of instruction sets that basically allow parallel computation or vectorized computation. And the problem is that the programming languages like C or Java for that matter or Python for that matter do not really have abstractions that allow you to do that map directly to these kinds of primitives. For example, there is no vectorized instruction in C or Java. So now the onus is on the compiler to convert your program that is written in your traditional plus minus multiplication form that humans find it easy to understand and map them efficiently to these complex instructions. And the quality of and the speed of your code will be determined by the quality of by the power of the compiler. All right. So actually I think that the stumbling block for architectural innovations is really compiler support. Architects I feel are pretty, they have lots of ideas on what could be done what more instructions could be added and so on. And they have been adding instructions and they could have been adding those instructions at a faster rate than what they are doing today. But if those instructions are only used by specialist assembly programmers, then that is not very satisfactory. Unless compilers provide first class support for such instruction sets, these instruction sets are not meaningful or there's not enough usage to justify the cost of developing them, right? So and unfortunately compilers haven't been keeping pace and for reasons that we're going to see soon. And so in many ways I think that if compilers can be improved, that's going to boost the entire computer systems ecosystem significantly. So in many ways compilers are today acting as a bottleneck, unfortunately. That's also great for people who are interested in compilers because it also means that any improvements that they make are likely to have a significant impact in the future. So every problem is also an opportunity. Now let's look at the other side, programming language abstractions. If we just look at the different programming languages that have been popular over the years, we'll get a sense of how programming languages have been evolving. For example, 1940s are probably the first computers and almost all programming was being done directly on the machine using assembly code, right? The lowest level of instructions that one can use to program that machine. In 1950s, the first few high-level languages came around along with their interpreters or the compilers. Actually the Fortran compiler is largely known as the first compiler. So Fortran, Flomatic, Cobol are some examples of languages in 1950s. Notice that these languages are higher level than assembly in the sense that they provide higher level abstractions. For example, they provide abstractions of variables. They provide abstractions of operators like plus, minus, and so on. They provide abstractions of control flow which is more restrictive. For example, a well-structured loop or an if-then-else statement in comparison to an assembly program which just allows you an arbitrary branch, right? In 1960s, there were more languages that were developed that were even more high level like Algol, Simula, and Basic. Some of these languages had started implicating object-oriented paradigms and so you can see why they were higher level than what the languages of 1950s. And then 1970s, C, Smalltalk, Simula, Prolog, ML. Now, some of these languages are actually still very, very popular such as C and ML, and even Prolog for that matter. And one takeaway from this is that language design is not easy and it took many years to come up with languages that actually stayed for a long time in the future. But even so, it wasn't as though these languages would solve all our problems. In fact, there were so many more problems that still remain. And then 1980s, we saw more languages like MATLAB, C++, Erlang, Perl, Tickle. And some of these languages were domain-specific. For example, MATLAB was supposed to be for scientific computation. They were very, very, very sensitive about high performance. But at the same time, they were very careful about making it very easy for programmers to course. For example, they will have higher level abstractions like matrix multiply operators and things like that. There were some languages like Perl and Tickle, they're popularly known as scripting languages. They didn't really care so much about performance but they really cared about high level abstractions so that it becomes really easy for the programmer to program. And it made sense for these languages to grow in 1980s because the computers were just becoming faster and faster. And so it became practical to have such languages which were actually very slow compared to the other languages like Assembly or C. But they were good enough because the computers were anyway so fast that they were good enough and they made computing and programming more accessible to users. C++ is an example of a language that introduced the object-oriented paradigm into the C language. So while object-oriented programming was already becoming popular with languages like Simula for example, people also liked the low level nature of C because it allowed them to do low level performance engineering, right? And C++ is an attempt to kind of get the best of both worlds. And people are still working on it actively. It is a noble cause but it's obviously a very hard problem because you want to have both low level performance control and have high level abstractions and that is a big challenge. And whenever you have high level abstractions and you are sensitive about performance, the only thing that can help you is good compiler support. 1990 saw more languages like Python, Haskell, Java, R, JavaScript. And some of these languages were motivated by the need for mobility or code security and things like that, for example, Java and JavaScript, while others were kind of domain-specific or had higher level, even higher level operators, for example, Haskell. All right. So, but even this is not enough, of course. And in 2000s, we had more languages like C-sharp, Go, Rust, Closure, F-sharp, and Nim. Now it's clear that people, you know, these languages, you know, so the typical tension that people see is we want both safety and performance. And obviously it seems pretty hard to do that. And so what people do is they kind of branch off in different directions to kind of attack this trade-off in different measures, right? So one language would have, you know, would improve the safety, but by compromising on performance in one dimension, while the other one would do the opposite and things like that. But it is interesting to note that if there was perfect compiler support, then well, you know, in theory, it is possible to have all the safety you like. You can have the highest level programming language, like maybe Go or Rust. I mean, these are supposed to be safe languages. And then you have compiler support that is able to translate and map these high-level safe abstractions to high-performance, low-level assembly code, just like, you know, just like the performance you would get if you wrote the same logic in a C program. And if that was possible, we would have the best of both worlds. So in many ways, the onus of being, or the hope that, you know, if anybody can solve this problem, it is through compiler support. And so compilers are indeed one of the most fundamental pieces of system design. If I look at 2010s, there are more languages like TensorFlow, DryadLink, WebAssembly, and so on. And you can see that because the applications are becoming more and more complex, for example, you know, AI-based applications. And so we have TensorFlow, and, or we have distributed applications and distributed data management application, that's DryadLink. So as applications and programs become more and more complex, which they are inevitably going to be, in my opinion, programming languages become higher and higher and higher level. And the higher level programming language necessitates better compiler support because the higher level you go, the more removed you are from the machine, the low-level machine. And unless you have good compiler support, your performance is going to be really bad. Okay, so, all right, so that gives us some sense of why compilers are very important from a programming language abstraction standpoint. If I look at, you know, the early adoption of compilers and how, you know, you know, some history of how compilers kind of got adopted, it is interesting to note that, you know, while the first language and compiler were accredited to John Bacchus, who was the designer of the Fortran language, the initial reaction by expert programmers at that time was that this is too slow and this is not going to work. And they were so used to programming in assembly that they scoffed at the idea that you write high-level code and they kind of believed, and those, you know, there were strong arguments made that compiled code would never have the same performance as handwritten code. Well, you know, we know that compilers actually gained tremendous adoption by 1958, even though, you know, the performance was perhaps not exactly the best possible in compiled code. And ever since, compilers have been super popular and it's not that, you know, assembly programmers are really very common. And most programs are actually written in languages that are either compiled or interpreted, depending on whether you care about performance, but very few programs are actually written in assembly language. And so, similarly, you know, compilers have really improved. And in fact, usually I find that the code generated by compilers is far superior than code that even an expert assembly writer would have ever been able to write for a given piece of logic. So, clearly, you know, it shows that, you know, there's something to learn from these experiences and the different views of people in history. All right. So to understand the evolution of compilers, let's look at some of the popular compilers. And in this chart, I'm showing GCC. And to understand how GCC has evolved over the years, I did a small study. I just plotted the number of lines of code, source lines of code in GCC over time, starting from 1988, which was the earliest, you know, commit that I found in the Git repository, and all the way to 2019, the latest commit last year. And you can see that the number of lines of code in GCC has increased almost at a linear pace, right? And while in 1988, it was something like, something between 10 or 100,000 lines long. By the way, the y-axis is the source lines of code into 1,000, right? So while in 1988, the number of lines of code in GCC was maybe around, you know, 10 to 100,000 lines of code, source lines of code. In 2019, there is more than 16 million lines of code in GCC. Now 16 million lines of code, I mean, it actually seems, now 16 million lines of code is a lot of complexity for a compiler. And indeed, this is a big problem, and one of the bottlenecks why we are not able to make our compilers, you know, arbitrarily more powerful. And this problem is not just with GCC. In fact, you know, people are aware of this kind of problem of the complexity of a compiler, and people have tried to solve it using software engineering methods. And one of those attempts has been the LLVM ecosystem. So LLVM is another open source compiler with a slightly different license, kind of a friendly competitor to GCC, and started in around 2001. And if you look at its evolution over time, you would find that even LLVM's complexity in terms of the source lines of code has increased linearly starting ever since it was founded, and has been growing at a steady rate. Now I should point out that, you know, ideally we would have liked the compiler to do much more than what it is doing today. And really the bottleneck is the complexity as it's shown, as it's kind of evident in these graphs.
