Title: Compiler Design Module 145 : Solving Space Partitioning Constraints Example
Video ID: 3CYkvL_3Pk4
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

We were discussing space partitioning constraints. We set up the space partitioning constraints for our example, for a running example. In one of the modules, we showed how these space partitioning constraints can be expressed in a graphical form, and from there you can derive what things, what iteration points can be executed in parallel and which of them need to be serialized. In another module, we discussed how we can formulate the space partitioning constraints for a given program, for a given loop nest mathematically, and then we discussed what are some possible solutions and non-solutions to that mathematical formulation. Now, we're going to discuss what is a method to actually solve these mathematical formulations or these space partitioning constraints expressed in mathematics. In the previous module, what we had done was we had just come out with a possible solutions and check whether any of those solutions fits for our required constraints or not. But now we're going to try and come up with an algorithm that gives us the solution. So given a set of constraints, how do we arrive at a solution? I'm not going to show you the program again, but I'm going to show you the corresponding space partitioning constraints that we formulated. The space partitioning constraints recall were because of two pairs of accesses. One was xij and xij minus one, and the other was y i minus one j and yij. So if I look at these two pairs of accesses or statements, one of them is a right, and so what I can do is I can say that whenever there's a data dependence between this pair, then it must be true that the corresponding iteration space points map to the same processor ID. Mathematically, that means that for all i, j, i prime, j prime, which represent the iteration indices, whenever i and i prime is between one and 100, and j and j prime is also between one and 100, and fi plus small f equals f prime, i prime plus small f prime. In other words, if i equals i prime and j equals j prime minus one, this is for xij and xij minus one, then it must be true that C matrix multiplied with ij plus small c1 equals the C matrix C21, C22 multiplied by i prime j prime plus small c2. Recall that this capital C11, C12, small c1, capital C21, capital C22, small c2 are unknowns, which form part of our coefficient matrix for the processor space. So the coefficient matrix multiplied with the iteration vector plus an additive small c1, small c gives me the corresponding processor ID. So this represents a function from iteration space to processor space. So whenever there's a data dependency, these functions should evaluate to the same processor ID. That's what this says. This was only for xij and xij minus one. Here is the corresponding set of constraints for y i minus one j and y ij. The constraints look very similar for all ij, i prime j prime if they lie between one and 100, and i minus one equals i prime. So this is the primary difference between the two formulations. Here capital F and small f and capital F prime and small f prime are different between the two formulations, which gives here it gives me i minus one equals i prime because y i minus one j, so i minus one from y i minus one j and i prime from y ij, and similarly j equals j prime. So i minus one equals i prime and j equals j prime. Whenever these are true, then it must be true that they map to the same processor ID. That's exactly the same type of constraint that we have here. Now, whatever our solution for these unknowns, Cs, capital Cs and small Cs, it should satisfy both these constraints. So that's the important part. The other part here is that these ij and i prime j prime are not the unknowns. Notice that there is a for-all quantifier on these variables, and so we basically need to come up with a solution which satisfies these constraints for all possible values of i and j, and i prime and j prime. So how do I go about solving this problem? I'm going to first show how one could start breaking down this problem for this particular running example that we're using throughout. In my next module, I'm going to generalize this method to a general problem statement. In general, every problem statement will have space partitioning constraints of a very similar nature, which means that there will be some quantifier over some number of iteration variables which will depend on the dimension of the iteration space. So for all vector i and vector i prime, whenever they lie within the address space, so that's b i plus b. Whenever there is a data dependency, so f i plus small f equals f prime i plus prime plus small i prime, then it must be true that they map to the same process ID. So c i plus small c equals c prime i prime plus small c prime. So that's what my general space partitioning constraints are going to look like. Now, the only question that is remaining is how to solve these space partitioning constraints, and that's what we are discussing using an example in this particular module. So the first thing to notice here is that I want to use Gaussian elimination to eliminate some of these variables, some of these bound variables, the quantified variables. So for example, for all i, j, i prime, j prime, it seems like there are four dimensions that we have to worry about. But notice that there are also constraints that i should be equal to i prime and j should be equal to j prime minus one. So I can just get rid of, for example, i prime and j prime, and just wherever there is i prime, I can just replace it with i because I know that I'm only interested in those cases when i equals i prime. And similarly, I can replace j prime with j plus one. And so that's what I do here. In this equation, I just replace i prime with a i and j prime with j plus one, and this is my new equation. So the only thing that I've been able to achieve is that through Gaussian elimination I have eliminated some of the variables, some of the bound variables so that I don't have to reason about them. And moreover, because I removed those, you know, used Gaussian elimination, I mean, I have basically taken into account these two equations. So I don't really need to, I mean, those equations are now encoded in this constraint automatically. Not only have I reduced the number of quantified variables, I've also not, like, I've also basically folded in the effect of these equations into my constraint. Similarly, I can do this for the other space partitioning constraint. Once again, I cross out i prime and j prime, and replace i prime with i minus one and j prime with j, and that's what I'm doing here. So now I have these two set of equations. It says c into ij plus small c1, c1 into ij plus small c1 equals c2 into ij plus one plus small c2. And here it says c1 into ij plus small c1 equals c2 into i minus one j plus small c2. So notice that these two equations are identical except for the part that has been written in green here. Okay, so now I have these constraints, these simplified constraints that have been simplified using Gaussian elimination, and now I'm going to try solving these simplified constraints. So here is the first thing I'm going to do. I'm just going to first consider this constraint here on the left, and I'm just going to rewrite it so that I bring everything to the left. High school method of solving equations, we bring everything to the left and collect all the coefficients for every unknown. So for example, i and j are the unknowns. So basically I collect the unknowns for i and I get c11 minus c21. So that's the coefficient for i. Similarly, I collect the coefficients for j. So that's c12 minus c22. And so that becomes the coefficient of j. And then the constant term becomes c1 minus c2 and minus c22. c22 is coming because of j plus one, right? So the plus one here is basically showing up as minus c22 here. And so this equals zero. So this becomes my rewritten equation where I have just kind of collected the unknown variables and their coefficients and moved everything to the left so that the right-hand side RHS is written as zero. Now the important thing to note here is that this equation should hold for all possible i and j that belong to this range. Now belong to this range is a little bit difficult thing to model. So I can kind of over approximate. In other words, I can be more conservative. I can say for all possible i and j, for all possible integers i and j, this must be true. In fact, for all possible real numbers i and j, this must be true. And if this must be true for all possible real numbers and if it's true for all possible real numbers, it will be true for all possible integers in this range. So I'm just being more conservative. If I can find that solution, then that solution is going to be good enough. And so what is that solution going to be? If this equation needs to hold for all possible i and j, it basically means that the coefficients of i and j and the constant coefficient should be all zero. In other words, because this must hold for all i and j, it must be true that c11 minus c21 equals zero, c12 minus c22 equals zero and c1 minus c22 minus c2 should also equal zero. And so that gives me equations only on the unknowns and that's something that I've made progress on. And so this is what my new equations look like. From this c11 minus c21 equals zero, I get c11 equals c21. Similarly, c12 equals c22. And finally, c1 equals c2 plus c22. So these are my constraints that I have collected from the equations that I had on the left-hand side. Now I'm going to do a similar exercise from the equations that I have on the right-hand side. And then I'm going to combine all these equations together and see what is the maximum rank solution that I can get. Once again, I want to point out that everything zero always remains a feasible solution. It will satisfy all these equations as well. It is a feasible solution. It's just not the maximum rank solution. It's not the best solution that we want. We want the solution that has maximum number of non-zeros in the coefficient matrix. The additive vector, we don't really care whether it's zero or not. So now we have collected these three constraints from the LHS constraints. So once again, c11 equals c21, c12 equals c22, and c1 equals c2 plus c22. Now I look at the same, I do the same thing on the RHS as well. And I bring everything to the left, collect all the coefficients, and once again, I get c11 minus c21 for i, c12 minus c22 for j, and c1 plus c21 minus c2 for the constant term. And once again, because this must hold for all possible i and j belonging to this range, and then once again over approximating, making it more conservative, what I get is c11 equals c21, but that's something that we already have. So everything needs to be set to zero. So c11 minus c21 should be zero, which means c11 equals c21, but that's a constraint that I already have. Similarly, c12 equals c22. That's again a constraint that I already have. So it's not giving me any new, this new set of constraints is not giving me any new information so far. But here is the new one that's going to get, which is the constant term should be equal to zero. So c1 plus c21 minus c2 should be equal to zero. And so that gives me a new constraint, c1 equals c2 minus c21. So just rewrote this equation so that I bring c2 and c21 to the right, and so I get c1 equals c2 minus c21. So these are the four constraints I get. And now I'm going to solve these constraints using our favorite Gaussian elimination. Now, we can use any kind of Gaussian elimination solver to solve these, but here is one easy way to think about it. Let's say c1 equals c2 plus c22, c1 equals c2 minus c21. So from these two, I straight away know that c22 equals minus c21. I can just subtract these two equations and from that I get c22 equals minus c21. I already know that c11 equals c21, c12 equals c22. And now I know that c22 equals minus c21. So I know an equality relation between all the four coefficient matrix elements. And so that's what it looks like. It says c11 equals c21. That's coming from here. c12 equals c22. That's coming from here. And c22 equals minus c21. And so that's why I say, I just made this a single equation which has c21 equals minus c12 equals minus c22 equals c11. And let me just call all these quantities small c. So c11 is small c, c21 is small c, c12 is minus small c, or I should say capital C, sorry. Let's call this capital C because I'm going to use small c later, maybe. And then, and so on. So we just use c. And so the coefficient matrix values we know, let's say c. And so, for example, this would be c. This will be minus c. This will be c. This will be minus c. This will be c. This will be minus c. This will be c. This will be minus c. So we have all the four values. And we can, for these, except that we don't know what c is, we're going to figure that out. But we also need to worry about the constant terms. So for the constant terms, basically we have c1 equals c2 plus c22. So what is plus c22? That's just minus c. So I get c1 equals c2 minus c. So that's the other constraint on the constant terms that I can derive, which is c1 equals c2 minus c. So now I have these two constraints. One is for the coefficient terms, and one is for the constant terms, additive terms. And now I need to solve for them. And what do I want? Once again, you know, everything equals zero is a possible solution, but I want a solution that is maximum rank. And notice that solutions that are just off, that are modular, some constant. So let's say, if I say everything is two, that is the same thing as saying everything is three or everything is one. So modular, a constant multiple for everything doesn't really matter in this framework for the coefficient matrix. Similarly, for the additive vector, anything with a constant additive value, for example, plus one or plus 10 or plus 100, doesn't matter. You're just shifting the values of the processor IDs, left or right. And that doesn't really matter, depending on the additive constant. So without loss of generality, we can pick the multiplicative values constant to be one and the additive values constant, the unknown constant to be zero. And then from there, we can derive all the other values based on the constraints that we have derived using Gaussian elimination. And so what we get is c11 equals c21 equals one, c12 equals c22 equals minus one, c1 equals minus one and c2 equals zero. And this is what it would look like if I just replace the values in the solution that I have obtained using Gaussian elimination and all the other things that we discussed, including elimination of quantified variables and stuff like that. We get c11 and c12 are one and minus one. Small c1 is minus one, so we get i minus j minus one. Similarly, these are one minus one and zero, so this gets i minus j. And so these are the two solutions we get. P1 which determines the function for statement s1 basically is i minus j minus one. And P2 which determines the function, the PID function for statement two is i minus j. And this is exactly the solution that we have been kind of guessing either through graphical method or just by written trial in our previous modules. This time we didn't have to do any guessing or any graphical method, but we arrived at the solution through a pure algorithm. But the algorithm was kind of, I showed you the algorithm by using an example. I haven't really generalized algorithm which I'm going to do in the next module. So this is what it looks like. For s1, it's P1 that is mapping to the processor ID space. It's the same processor ID space, but the functions are different. This is P1 function and this is the P2 function. Now, notice that because of these P1 and P2 functions, some of the iterations in s1, different iterations in s1 may map to the same processor ID. For example, when I say i minus j minus one, for example, one comma one and two comma two, are going to map to the same processor ID minus one. Similarly, when I look at s2, then one comma one and two comma two and three comma three and four comma four, they're all going to map to the same processor ID zero. Similarly, if I look across P1 and P2, the iteration index of s1 which is two comma one would map to zero and one comma one of s2 would map to zero. Two comma one of s1 would map to the same processor ID as one comma one of s2. The ranges are common for some of these domain points for these two functions within the same function P1 or P2 or across the two functions P1 and P2. The only thing that is remaining now in terms of code generation and program transformation is that we can create separate threads for every processor and now we can run each separate thread in parallel. But if two or more iteration points map to the same processor ID, then we have to run them sequentially. Moreover, it's important that we run it in the same order as that it was present in the original untransformed program. So the remaining thing is that if s1 and s2 map to the same P for some i comma j and i prime comma j prime, then their relative order must be preserved, the relative order in the original program. So if, for example, two comma one of s1 was executing before one comma one of s2, then that order should remain preserved when my transformed program as well. And this is something we haven't really discussed. We are only discussing the mapping from statements to processor IDs. We haven't really discussed the code generation strategy. So just in case you are wondering, we are going to be discussing that a couple of lecture modules later. So please, yeah, so don't worry about that if you are worrying about that. But we have at least solved the problem of what should be the mapping. And notice that in our map, when we are trying to get our mapping, we try to ensure that we have as many non-zero values in the coefficient matrix as possible because when we chose, in this case, there was only one value to be chosen and we chose that to be one and not zero. And so that's why it is a maximum rank solution. Also, I cheated here a little bit in the sense that I started with a coefficient matrix that had only one row because I'm using, assuming this information that I know that the solution is going to be a rank one solution. So they will have one row. But in reality, when you're going to solve such constraints, you will have a coefficient matrix of two rows in this example because the iteration space was of depth two and this solution is going to automatically give you a solution which says that, oh, by the way, the second row can be a linear combination, can be a linear multiple of the first row. And so even though there are four unknowns, you would still get a rank one solution. So with one row, I got a rank one solution. I invite you to try this at home, that even if you try to use two rows, you're still going to get a rank one solution if you use the same method of Gaussian elimination and the quantifier elimination that we discussed today.
