Title: Compiler Design Module 149 : Tightening the Loop Bounds for Synchronization Free Parallelism
Video ID: guAjKaypwto
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

In our quest for identifying the best possible rearrangement of the loop such that there is no synchronization, we first identify the space partitioning constraints. Then we solve the space partitioning constraints to obtain maximum rank functions, find functions from iteration space to processor space. And then in our last module, we discussed a code generation strategy. Given a set of fine functions, one for each statement, we found some code generation strategy that basically makes the outer loops the processor loops. In other words, the outer loops can be fully parallelized. The outer loops are embarrassingly parallel and the inner loops are basically loops that are executing one on each processor and they need to be sequential. And we also said that if it's a parallel machine that gives you more parallelism, if it's a uniprocessor machine, then it gives you better locality because things that had data dependencies are now going to be accessed close in time. In other words, you have reduced the reuse distance. But one of the problems with the code generation strategy that we discussed in our previous module is that the code was not efficient. In fact, the code that is executed for every processor was almost as expensive as the total amount of work that was being done. In fact, we have increased the total amount of work that is being done. And if it was a sequential machine, the generated code would actually be slower than the original program. And so that doesn't look like a very good idea. What was basically the problem is something that we're going to discuss in our module today. And also the solution, which I call tightening the loop bounds. The solution for the running example that we had discussed in our previous module was that the outer loop basically iterates over the processor IDs. So for example, for p equals minus 101, plus 100, p plus plus, for i equals 0 to 100, for j equals 0 to 100. If p equals i minus j minus 1, then do something. If p equals i minus j, then do something else. This is S1 and S2. And the problem is that I am iterating, for example, in the inner loop over j from 0 to 100. But these statements will only execute for one value of j. For example, S1 will execute for the value of j which matches p equals i minus j minus 1. In other words, it will execute for j equals i minus p minus 1. Similarly, this particular statement, the second statement, S2 would execute for j equals i minus p. And so each of these statements is only going to execute for one value of j for a given p and i. Then why would you iterate over 100 values of j unnecessarily? If I look at any one statement, then out of the 100 iterations of the inner loop, only one iteration is actually doing anything for any one statement. If I look at both the statements, then out of the whole 100 iterations of the inner loop, only two iterations, at most two iterations, are actually having any effect on the program state at all. Others are just iterating unnecessarily. Other 98 iterations are just empty iterations. So that's what I'm calling empty iterations here. And tightening the loop bounds can also be thought of as elimination of empty iterations. And once we tighten the loop bounds, we basically reduce the amount of work that the computer has to do without actually changing the result of the program. In this case also, I can move from j equals 0 to 100 to something which is more tighter. And notice that because it's the innermost loop, I can have lower bounds and upper bounds, which are in terms of int, because at this point, the values of int are already fixed. So to understand this better, I'm going to use a simpler example than the running example that I have shown you in the previous slide. So let's say my program was simply for i equals 0 to 100, x i equals 0. Now this loop is an embarrassingly parallel loop, but that's not how our algorithm works. I mean, we could have just said, okay, just put a parallel keyword at the top and we are done. But that's not how our space partitioning algorithm works. What will the space partitioning algorithm do for this example? It'll say, okay, what is the iteration space? It's i from 0 to 100. So what is the mapping function that basically obeys the data dependencies? Notice that there are no data dependencies across different iterations. It's an embarrassingly parallel loop. So I'm going to get a full rank solution for my space partitioning constraints. The rank here is only one, the loop nest depth is only one. So the solution is just capital C, the coefficient matrix is one and small c, the additive vector is zero. In other words, the processor ID equals the iteration ID. All right. So p equals i and it's a one-dimensional processor space as well. So it's an identity mapping from each iteration to each processor ID. And now if I look at my code generation strategy, what is it going to do to this program? It's going to transform it to something like this. It's going to say outer loop is on p, inner loop is on i. So I'm just pasting the original program in the body of the outer loop. And so for p equals 0 to 100, p++. And now I go to for i equals 0 to 100, i++. If p equals i, x i equals 0. Now this may look weird because bizarre because I've just changed a linear loop into a quadratic loop. Why is this useful? Well, yeah, I mean, in this particular example, it seems like this is wasteful. And in fact, this is the solution that we want to fix right now. And after we fix it, the solution will work not only on this example, but also on other examples, which may not have been data parallel, embarrassingly parallel. So in this case, for example, the inner loop has i equals 0 to 100. But 99 of these iterations from 0 to 100 are going to be empty iterations. Only one iteration where i equals p is going to have some effect. And so how can I tighten the loop bounds of the inner loop? I can say something like, so it has a lot of empty iterations. And so what I can do is I can just tighten the loop bounds to lower bound is p and upper bound is p. So from 0 to 100, I've gone to p to p, which means I have reduced from 100 iterations of which 99 were empty to one iteration, which is the non-empty iteration. And so this is what my new code looks like. Now, even this is not very satisfactory, although the number of iterations I am doing is now correct. We are still doing 100 iterations and the inner loop is only doing one iteration for every outer loop. So the inner loop can actually be eliminated here. And we're going to discuss such transformations later on. But at least we should in this module be able to figure out how to tighten these bounds, how to determine these lower bounds and upper bounds, these tighten the lower bounds and upper bounds. And here is a hint. It's not going to be anything that we don't already know. We're basically going to be using the Fourier mode skin method to identify the lower and upper bounds, but doing appropriate projection of the polyhedron for every state. So in this case also, I just basically figure out what are all the, for a given value of p, what are all the possible values that I can take for the iteration space of this particular statement x i equals 0. And I basically figure out that the lower bound must be p and the upper bound must be p as well. And so that's how I obtain this solution. So I'm going to discuss this elimination of empty iterations or tightening of loop bounds algorithm in this module. So just to understand what solution we expect for our running example, the example that I showed on the first slide. So we have for p equals minus 101 to 100, for i equals 0 to 100, for j equals 0 to 100, and then something. Now I said that of these 100 inner loop iterations, maybe 98 are empty iterations. So how do I fix that? Well, here I'm just going to show you the solution first, and then we're going to see the algorithm to arrive at the solution. So the solution is going to be j equals maximum of 0, i minus p minus 1. And that's j is greater than equal to this, and j is less than equal to minimum of 100, i minus p. And where is this i minus p minus 1 and i minus p coming? Well, notice that it has very striking similarity to these processor mapping functions that I have. I just basically said, because j is now the inner loop, I just rewrite j in terms of p for both the statements and then basically expand my polyhedron such that it accommodates the polyhedrons of both S1 and S2. So this is the solution we're going to look at the algorithm very soon. Actually, it is not just enough to tighten the inner loop bounds. We can also tighten the loop bounds of i because some of the iterations of the ith loop are also empty because for a given value of p, I cannot usually iterate for all the 100 elements values of i because these statements are only going to be executed for some combinations of p comma i for all possible values of j. And so even here we have some empty iterations and we can use again the same Fourier mode scheme method to identify what is the lower bound of i and what is the upper bound of i when I project on i at this point for a given value of p. All right, so this is what the solution is going to look like at the second loop here, which is i is greater than equal to max of 0 comma p and i is less than equal to min of 100 comma 101 plus p. So these are the tightened loop bounds. Notice that these loop bounds are strictly tighter or at least as tight as the original loop bound because we are using max and min and that automatically tells you that we're not increasing the space of iterations. We are only decreasing the space if anything. Okay, so how do I apply at these solutions? As I said, we're going to use the Fourier mode scheme method and let's just do it. Let's just use the Fourier mode scheme method on this particular example to see how it will work and also to review and refresh how would the Fourier mode scheme method works. So we're first going to identify the constraints for S1, then we are going to identify the constraints for S2 and then we are going to take a union over them and that's basically this strategy we're going to employ. And so when I look for S1, this is the iteration space. I say p is between 101 and 100, that's coming from the outer loop, i is between 0 and 100, j is between 0 and 100, p equals i minus j minus 1. And so the way to write p equals i minus j minus 1, notice that for S1 only those iterations will be executed when p equals i minus j minus 1. That was our mapping function, that's the predicate in our generated code. And so I need to basically say I want to tighten the bounds using this predicate and so I represent this predicate p equals i minus j minus 1 as a pair of two inequalities. One is p is greater than equal to i minus j minus 1 and the other is p is less than equal to i minus j minus 1. So I just use two inequalities to represent one equality. Together this inequality and this inequality imply that p equals i minus j minus 1. And now I have all the constraints on my iteration indices in the form of inequalities and now I can use the Fourier Modeskin method to project on any dimension. For example, I can first project on p to identify what are the lower and upper bounds on of p and if I just do that I claim that what I'm going to get is that p lies between minus 101 and 100. This is actually something that we had also done in our previous module when we were trying to understand what is the minimum processor id and the maximum processor id that we need to iterate against. But then after we have fixed a value of p now we can project the remaining dimensions of the polyhedron which is i comma j on a single dimension i and from that we will get the lower bound and upper bound of i. And finally we can you know for a given value of p and i I can project the remaining dimension j to identify its project on the remaining dimension j to identify its lower bound and upper bound. So that's the simple algorithm and we know how to solve it using the Fourier Modeskin method and this is the solution that I'm going to get using that algorithm. This is the Fourier Modeskin method again and so p between minus 101 to 100 i is greater than equal to max of 0 comma p plus 1 i is less than equal to min of 100 comma 101 plus p. So this is just projecting on i projecting the polyhedron formed by i comma j for a specific value of p on i and so that just gives me this and finally j equals i minus p minus 1. So this is the polyhedron that I get for S1 and let's say let's assume for argument's sake that the only statement in my body was S1 then I could have just gotten rid of S2 completely in which case I would have you know I would have I would have already had my solution my outer loop would have been for p and these are the lower bounds and upper bounds the inner loop would have been for i which these are the lower bounds and upper bounds and for j there's only a single value so I don't even need a loop on j and I could have just said x i I could have just said j equals i minus p minus 1 and remove this inner loop completely and then I could have just executed S1 without needing to have any predicate as well but the problem here is slightly more interesting because it's slightly more complex because it has two different statements S1 and S2 and the polyhedron space for S1 may be different from the polyhedron space of S2 and so let's see what is the polyhedron space for S2 and once again I just rewrite the I just write the all the bounds on all the iteration indices so once again p is between minus 101 and 100 i is between 0 and 100 j is between 0 and 100 and p equals i minus j so this time the difference is in S1 it was p equals i minus j minus 1 for S2 it is p equals i minus j and once again when I use the Fourier mode scan method to solve for to project first on p then on i and finally on j I basically get these lower bounds and upper bounds once again p is from minus 101 to 100 this is the same solution that we had in our last module as well then i is greater than equal to max of 0 comma p notice that this lower bound of i is different from the lower bound of i that I had from S1 where it was max of 0 comma p plus 1 here it is max of 0 comma p the upper bound of i is min of 100 comma 100 plus p once again the upper bound of i in for S2 is different from the upper bound of i for S1 for S1 the upper bound was min of 100 comma 101 plus p and here it is min of 100 comma 100 plus p so 101 and 100 so those are that's the difference between the upper bound of i and finally the lower bound and upper bound of j are both i minus p and that is also different in case of S2 it is i minus p in the case of S1 it was i minus p minus 1 now these are the two polyhedron spaces that we have got for each of S1 and S2 and what do and these and if I take the union the strict union of these S1 and S2 what I end up with is not non-polyhedron space because you know it's a non-convex space because the union of two polyhedrons need not be a polyhedron but because we are interested in these kind of affine loop nests we basically find the tightest polyhedron that encloses this union of two polyhedrons so the tightest convex polyhedron that encloses this non-convex union of two constituent polyhedra okay and so how do I find that well on the first dimension p they are identical so I don't have to do anything on the second dimension I just basically take the most liberal answer so which is more liberal max zero comma p or max zero comma p plus one max zero comma p is the one that accommodates more values right because p is smaller than p plus one and so max zero comma p now becomes a lower bound for i and similarly which is more liberal on the upper bound min 100 comma 100 plus p or min 100 comma 101 plus p it's min of 100 comma 101 plus p which is more liberal it accommodates more values and so basically we get this is the lower bound for i and this is the upper bound for i similarly when I look at j I say i minus p and i minus p minus one which is smaller clearly i minus p minus one is smaller than i minus p so this becomes my lower bound and for j and this becomes my upper bound for j notice that you know I can just choose my lower bounds and upper bounds and not worry about correctness because anyway all my executions are going to be predicated so even if I for example take a lose upper bound or like a loose lower bound it doesn't change the correctness of my program it only changes the performance of my program so finally the union looks something like this p is between minus 101 to 100 i is between max of zero comma p and min of 100 comma 101 plus p so you know the lower bound is coming from s2 and the upper bound is coming from s1 and similarly j is between i minus p minus one and i minus p once again the lower bound is coming from s1 and the upper bound is coming from s2 and now I can rewrite my code to obtain the final generated code the final generated code basically just changes the lower bound and the upper bound for the the two loops in this loop nest i is bit from max of zero comma p to min of 100 comma 101 plus p and j goes from zero comma i minus p minus one to j min of 100 comma i minus p so this is our new generated code I claim that this code is faster than the code that we had generated in our previous lecture module where we were iterating the inner loop for all the 100 iterations of j and many of those were empty iterations this time I am I'm sure that none of the iterations are going to be empty either they will be executed each iteration for p comma i comma j will either execute s1 or s2 or both okay said differently the number of actual iterations that we are going to execute is going to be the number of values that p can take multiplied by the number of values that i takes for those each value of p average over p multiplied by all the values that j takes over each value of p comma i and notice that the number of values that j takes is very small it's at most two for a given value of p comma i and so you know the overall number of iterations hasn't it hasn't become cubic or anything like this anything like that although the code still looks like a triple loop nest the number of iterations actually remains quadratic and so that's our desired solution
