Title: Compiler Design Module 6 : Regular Expressions
Video ID: p1DlQp_6TgI
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

Okay, so Last time we Talked about lexical analysis and we said that lexical analysis process which converts a stream of characters to a stream of tokens and What is a token? A token is a token class and the lexeme and lexeme is a string that is You know bitten off from stream of characters Now when we talk about a token class we say that You know, for example an identifier is a token class or a Keyword is a token class a constant is a token class and so on and so how do we identify? Which what string belongs to what token class well we basically have some rules to say that for example an identifier is a string of characters alphabets and numbers, but you must begin with an alphabet right or Keyword is one of the following if else then while for and so on or a constant is just a string of numbers Or a constant could be a string of numbers with a decimal point and then another string of numbers and so on And so so we need to formally define what is a token class In the sense that what are the set of strings or lexemes that a token class accepts? So in so in general There is this concept of a language and what is the language well, you know, we already understand what a language is a language actually, you know Simplistically speaking a language is a set of strings and this is actually the definition that we're going to use for our purposes In this course as well So we say that a string belongs to a language if that string is belongs to the set of strings, right? So let's take some examples You know the English language is a language the Hindi language is a language the English and the Hindi languages have different work on different alphabets So in other words the character sets are different But they both basically accept certain strings and do not accept other certain other strings for example, well-formed sentences are part of these languages and Sentences that are not well-formed are not part of these languages all right The C programming language is a language and similarly we could define other language We can say that you know for a lexical analysis purpose. We could say that this is the language of keywords so every string that is Potentially a keyword belongs to the language and every string string that cannot be a keyword does not belong to the language Similarly, you could have a language of identifiers a language of constants and so on all right, so So perhaps, you know, so different as we saw last time different languages made different choices of What are the typical tokens? What what could kind of strings can belong to those tokens and so on? But modern languages typically want to keep things as simple as possible yet as human readable and intuitive as possible And one of the most simplest languages is is the is a class of language is called regular language Now before we before I talk about regular language, I should also make a distinction between formal language and an informal language Well of an informal language is a language like English, which is kind of not formally specified using You know very strict rules, although there are Strong grammatical rules related to natural languages Those like those rules can have exceptions and things like that on the other hand formal languages Very strict rules on what they will accept and what they will not accept and so formal languages also have a very technical mathematical way of specifying them and Regular language is a category of formal languages. It is actually the weakest form of formal languages, which are widely used Especially in compilers. 


All right, so so to understand regular languages, let's first understand Regular expressions, okay So What is the regular expression? Well, I'm going to define a language of regular expressions and I'm just going to define it now And then we're going to see why why it's interesting. All right, so let's say there is some Set of characters sigma. All right, so this is a set of characters and We can also call this the alphabet So a language is over an alphabet in this in other words the strings are made up of The characters belonging to sigma. All right so So what is the regular expression? Well I'm going to define what is the regular expression by basically showing what are exact what are the constructors of regular expressions? so a character C is Is a regular expression All right, so a character C where C belongs to sigma, okay So any character C standalone character C is a regular expression. All right, just a definition of regular expression. All right The epsilon character is a regular expression. So what is an epsilon? Epsilon represents the Empty string. All right, so this basically represents the empty string. Just let me Let me just make a comment here that what is an epsilon epsilon is the empty string I should point out that Epsilon is an empty string and this is different from an empty set. All right, so we're going to see what an empty Why an empty set is interesting? So yeah, just just keep in mind that an empty string is different from an empty set and epsilon is an empty string All right Okay now Now we have you know, we already have some Examples of a regular expression or over an alphabet sigma. Now, I'm going to define more so if if A is a regular expression and B is a regular expression Then A plus B is also a regular expression. All right, just definition. So just define this new operator plus all right, so plus is an operator so for example C plus D is A regular expression assuming that's both C and D are part of the alphabet. All right Similarly because C plus D is a regular expression C plus D plus E Is also a regular expression, right? Because this is a regular expression and then I can I can kind of do this over and over and so you can See that I can create an arbitrarily long regular expression using this constructor plus, right? So as long as both A and B are regular expressions, then A plus B is also a regular expression definition All right. Similarly if A is a regular expression and B is a regular expression then AB Is also a regular expression. So by AB I mean concatenation. All right, so concat this is this is concatenation Okay, so for example I'm going to omit the single quotes. So C D E is An example of a regular expression assuming C D and E are all parts of that or all characters in the alphabet Okay and once again, I can make arbitrary long strings to make and they'll all be called regular expressions and then A star Is also a regular expression here A If A is a regular expression, then A star is also a regular expression. All right, so this is The star is called the cleanest star operator so so I just defined what a regular expression. All right, and so first of all notice that This is a language that I have defined right? So this is the language of regular expressions over a set of say over a character set Sigma What do I mean by that? So for example, I could say that C plus B concatenated with E plus F and the whole thing star and Then the whole thing concatenated with A plus B. Well, this is a regular expression. 



All right why is it this a regular expression because This belongs to the language of regular expressions Because I can construct this expression by using the operators that we just discussed Okay All right. So this is a regular expression and and and once again, you know We have actually defined a language of regular expressions using the operators that we just discussed in the previous slide 


now every language is Associated with a meaning function. All right, so language Meaning usually every language is associated with a meaning function. And so we want to say that, you know, this string represents This quantity this string represents this quantity and so on so regular expressions Has also has a meaning every regular expression has a meaning it represents a regular language which means that every regular expression encodes a set of strings that belong to that language encoded by that regular expression and Then you know, you know that what strings do not belong to this regular expression 


Okay, so So let's understand the meaning of the regular expression So if I take the regular expression Formed by the single character C Then the meaning of this regular expression is basically So I need to basically say what is the language that it represents right and recall what is the language a language is a set of strings, so actually this this regular expression just represents a set of containing a single string which contains the alphabet character C Right, so so the regular expression C represents a set that contains a single string C All right similarly the regular expression epsilon represents a set that contains a Single element the empty string, all right, so Okay now Let's consider what? if there is a regular expression formed by Unioning so by the plus operator is also called the union operator So a regular expression that is formed by union in two different regular expressions the language represented by this is basically the union of the sets represented by a And the sets are presented by B. All right, so let me just write it more formally a plus B represents all the strings that belong to a All right union with All the strings that belong to B notice that I am using LA to represent the language of A and LB to represent the language of B. I can also use shorthand and just use A and B here instead, right? So I may do this in Subsequent slides so you should you should know what it means but basically it means that A plus B represents a language that accepts everything that A accepts and Everything that B accepts. All right, so it's it kind of takes a union of both the strings Both the sets of strings. All right, and let's look at concatenation. This is concat concatenation here we get a set that is formed by Concatenating any string in A with any string in B All right, so it's a think of it as a Cartesian product so any string in A can be concatenated with any other string in B and All such strings would be a part of the language that is represented by the regular expression AB Let me write it more formally AB such that A belongs to A and B belongs to so all such strings formed by Substrings A and B by concatenating them where the substring A belongs to capital A the language formed by A and substring B belongs to the language represented by B okay, and finally Kleene star A star and this is This is supposed to represent iteration and here the idea is that A could be so A represents a regular expression and then A could be concatenated with itself any number of times All right, so this is actually equivalent to A to the power 0 plus A power 1 plus A to the power 2 plus A to the power 3 plus dot dot dot all the way to infinity. All right, so any number of times where A to the power I is basically A concatenated with itself I times. All right 


Okay, let's let's take some examples. All right, so Let's assume that The character set is formed by two characters 0 and 1 Then an example of a regular Expression is 1 star. Is this a regular expression? Indeed It is 1 is a regular expression and then I can put a Kleene star on that and that's a regular expression What is the language represented by this regular expression? Well, what is the language represented by 1? It's just the string 1 And then I put a Kleene star on that so I can repeat this string 0 or more times, right? So if I repeat it 0 times, what do I get? I get the empty string right, so let me Let me represent the language. So it's the start with the empty string 1 appearing once 1 appearing twice and so on So pretty much all strings formed by concatenating Ones or all strings of ones. All right, that's what one star Okay, let's take another example Let's say I say zero star plus one star well this says that zero star is nothing but all strings of zeros just like one star is all strings containing zero one any number of ones similarly zero star is called any all strings containing any number of zeros and zero star plus one star is nothing, but the empty string zero one zero zero one one And so I could write them in any order. I like I just chose to write it in increasing order of the length but basically the union of the two Sets formed by zero star and one star Let's take another example Let's say we have one plus zero Okay, so this represents a language One plus zero represents either one or zero and then we concatenate one to it. So what do we get? We get only two elements one one and Zero one. Okay. So so that's the language Let's take another example zero plus one star Now this says that I could take either zero or one and then Concatenate any of them with any of them, right? So so What are some strings first of all because it's a star. So the empty string would be part of the set then just a single zero a single one sure Then zero could be concatenated with itself Zero could be concatenated with one and similarly one zero one one zeros I'm going to omit the quotes zero zero one Zero one zero one one zero and so on so forth, right? So pretty much any string that can be a combination of one zeros, right? It's part of zero plus one star Okay, so actually this this if you notice zero plus one Represent also is equivalent to sigma isn't it zero plus one represents The set formed by the characters all the characters in sigma that's zero and one and so zero plus one star Has a special name and it's called sigma star 


Okay in general there are there is many ways to write a regular expression For the same regular language, by the way, what is the regular language? Well, a regular language is basically a language that can be described through a regular expression just like we We saw earlier. All right, so we saw we defined what's a regular expression is then we define the meaning of a regular expression In the sense that every regular expression defines a language and so any language that can be defined using any regular expression is called a regular language, all right, and the point I'm making here is that Many, you know, there's a many to one mapping between regular expressions and regular languages, which means that Multiple regular expressions can represent the same regular language and we just saw an example So here's a very simple example zero plus one one is the same language as zero one plus one one Okay, and these are two different regular expressions and I can create more examples like that All right. Okay
