Title: Compiler Design Module 110 : Loop Inversion
Video ID: Kio_nQxlYRk
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

we have been discussing a lot of transformations and analysis for programs, and one of the subtleties of all these analyses is dealing with loops. So in dataflow analysis, because of the presence of loops, we require multiple iterations of the dataflow analysis iteration algorithm, the fixed-point iteration algorithm. For example, if there were no loops in our programs, then dataflow analysis would have just finished, the fixed-point iteration algorithm would have just finished the iteration. So that's good for handling some types of analysis that are required for loops. But there are so many other types of interesting optimizations and transformations and analyses that can be performed on loops that do not really fit as dataflow analysis. So we're going to discuss some of them in the coming few modules. Now, why are we looking at loops specifically? Because loops are firstly, very commonly present in our programs. I'm not aware of any practical, useful program that does not have at least some loops. Also, most of the runtime of a program is actually spent in loops. So if you can optimize loops better, you must try to do that. The question here is that, okay, what are the optimizations that are possible for loops? Once we discuss those optimizations, how they fit with all the other optimizations that we have discussed, which were modeled as dataflow analysis. So let's look at an example of a loop transformation. I'm using this example on the slide. Let's say there is a computation, t equals m plus n, and then there's a loop. The loop is really simple and see, there's a for loop for i equals 0 to n, i plus plus, ai equals t. Now, you can see that this program already has loop invariant port motion implemented, and this is something that we have already discussed. So there is no redundancy. There's no partial redundancy in this particular program, because loop ai is different for every iteration. t is just a variable because it has been already moved out. The computation for t has already been moved out. But we can still make this loop better, all right? So how can we make this loop better? Well, I claim that the version on the right is A, equivalent to the version on the left, and B, it is actually a better version in terms of runtime than the left. Although it looks bigger, so it looks like it's slightly bigger in port size, perhaps, but from a runtime perspective, the right-side program would typically be faster than the left-side program. So let's first look at the right-side program. So the right-side program says, if n is greater than zero, i equals zero, do while. So in the original program, I had for, which is also similar to the while loop construct. Here, I have a do while construct. So the difference between while do and do while is, in do while, the first iteration is always executed. All right, so the first iteration is executed. In this case, it would be a zero equals zero, i plus plus, and then we will check. And if the check succeeds, we are going to go back to the start of the do while loop, which means this statement. And if it fails, then we are going to come out of the do while loop. Now you can check for yourself that both the programs are kind of functionally equivalent in the sense that they assign the same values to the array A from i to n. They just assign both of them, both of these programs are assigning the same values to the elements of array A. So these programs are equivalent, but what is the point? Why is this a good transformation? Why is this an optimization? So to understand that, let's look at the control flow graphs of the two programs. In the first program, this, the first block is maybe doing t equals m plus n. The second block is probably doing i, it's also doing i equals zero, right? Because this is the initialization condition that gets executed before the loop starts, right? The first, before the first iteration of the loop and then it never executes, right? So that's what a for loop means. So i equals zero also gets executed in this basic block. And then I check whether i is less than n. If i is less than n, then if it is false, then you exit. If it is true, then you execute the body of the loop and the body of the loop is probably ai equals t. And then after you execute ai equals t, there is an unconditional branch to the condition, the header of the loop, which is the condition of this particular for loop, which is i is less than n. So this is an unconditional branch and this is a conditional branch, right? Because here there are two things that are going out. Here there is a single branch that's coming out. So it's this, because it's a single branch that's coming out, it's an unconditional branch because it says two branches that are coming out, it's a conditional branch because depending on the condition, it's going to go one way or the other. Now, why is this an unconditional branch? Well, it's very clear that this is a branch because it wants to jump to the top of the loop. So it's not like it's going to be a fall through region. I cannot place the condition after the body, right? So that won't make sense. So I can't place i is less than n after ai equals t. So I have to execute the branch to get back to i is less than n. So I need an unconditional branch. Now let's look at the program on the right. And this is the control flow graph of the program on the right. I first do t equals m plus n, then I check whether n is greater than zero or not. If it is false, then I go to exit. If it's true, then I go to this particular basic block, which is the body, which is not still, which is, you know, so actually I should have added one more basic block here, which I'm missing. So let me just add it. So on the two branch, there should have been one more basic block, which would say i equals zero, okay? And then we basically just fall through. So it's not a branch. I mean, it's just the next instruction to the body of the loop. So this is going to be the body of the loop. And this is basically, the first statement of the body of the loop is going to be ai equals i, all right? And then maybe I'm going to do one more thing. I'm going to say i plus plus, okay? And then I have a conditional branch. Now I'm going to check here that whether i is less than n or not. So maybe I do i plus plus here rather than there. And in this particular basic block, let me just write this again. This, let me check i is less than n. Now, if i is less than n, then if it's true, then you jump back. If it's false, then you jump to exit. So this is what the new program, transform program looks like. Now, why is this a better or faster program than the first program? And the answer is, you should know, what is the most important? It seems like the program has become bigger, slightly bigger, because maybe I have two checks. I have if n is greater than zero, and then while i is less than n. So it seems like there are two checks in this program. Whereas in the original program, there was only one check, which was i less than n. So why is this program better? Well, to answer this question, you have to first ask, where is this program spending most of its time in? And so we're going to make the assumption that most of the time the program is spending in the loop, because the initialization is gonna only happen once, but maybe the loop is going to get executed a million times. And so if the loop is getting executed a million times, all the instructions that are a part of the loop are going to be executed a million times. And so if we can reduce one instruction in the loop, that's a reduction of million instructions overall. So I'm going to claim that the second program, the program on the right, has fewer instructions in the loop than the program on the left. And so that can be seen, because in the program on the right, there is ai equals i, i plus plus, and then there is a conditional branch. So there's only one conditional branch, or only one branch, conditional or unconditional, in the body of the loop. That conditional branch either jumps to the beginning of the loop, the head of the loop, or it just exits, all right? Where on the program on the left actually has two branches. One of them is the conditional branch, which is coming just from the beginning of the header of the loop, and the other is the unconditional branch that's jumping back to the header of the loop. So if you look at that, then also, I mean, of course this is not complete, this should have been i plus plus as well. All right, so when you look at this, you can see that there are two branches, everything else is the same, but the program on the left has two branches, one unconditional branch and one conditional branch, whereas the program on the right has only one branch, just the conditional branch, inside the loop body. And so we are saving one branch in the transform program in the loop body, although there may be more branches in the rest of the program, which is going to be executed less often, but inside the loop body, we have been able to save an instruction. More importantly, a branch. And in fact, a branch is one of the more expensive instructions if you consider the computer architecture, underlying computer architecture, if you take, for example, a five-step pipeline, or even if you take a more complex, modern superscalar machine, a branch can make problems difficult for the hardware because either it has to correctly predict what is the target of the branch, or it has to flush the pipeline. So branches are actually expensive propositions compared to other instructions like arithmetic. And so saving a branch is a big deal. It's a bigger deal than saving an instruction. In both cases, because it's a part of the loop, if you save even some part of it, then you just multiply it by a factor of the number of times the loop is going to execute. And so this is a very worthy optimization. And so here is, I mean, basically, here is a summary of why this is a transformation. In this particular program, there are two branches per iteration. And in this particular program, there's only one branch per iteration. Okay, great. And we already discussed that branches become difficult to predict in hardware, and so reducing a branch is actually a significant optimization. All right, so this kind of transformation is actually called loop inversion, because in a way, we have inverted the loop. From for loop, we have made it a do-while loop, right? So we have the first iteration is definitely going to execute, and then we are going to check after that. So in the original loop, the check was present at the beginning of the loop. In the new loop, the check is present at the end of the loop, and we have one extra check outside the loop, right? And so this kind of transformation is also called loop inversion, right? So we also call this loop inversion. All right, so, all right. Now, this is just one example of a loop transformation and why it is an effective transformation. Also notice that this transformation has very little to do with kind of transformations that we have discussed earlier, which were based on data flow analysis. This kind of transformation requires us to understand the loop structure and then transform it based on our understanding of what it is. And so what is a loop structure anyway? And I think, you know, typically most loops are going to have this structure, which is there's some initialization, there is some condition to check on every iteration of the loop, including the first iteration, before the first iteration, and then there is some step which is executed at the end of the loop. And because it's a common pattern, the fault construct was introduced in high-level languages like C and everything above it. And so, I mean, one way to easily see this loop structure is to just use the fault construct. And so there's an initialization condition, a con, there's an initialization statement, a condition, and a step. And if I look at it from a control flow graph perspective, I first execute init, all right, for example, i equals zero. Then I execute con, so I'm gonna check whether i is less than n or not. If it is false, then just exit the loop. If it's true, then execute the body of the loop. All right, notice that I haven't executed the step yet. After we have executed the body, then execute the step, for example, i++. And then you jump back to the condition. And so this is a very common structure of a loop, especially a for loop is exactly this kind of structure. So with this structure, you know, we can basically, once we understand and we are able to identify the structure of the loop, we can do many things with it. And loop inversion was something that we have seen. And so let's try to see this in this abstract world, right? So we saw loop inversion using a concrete example. Now I'm going to try to show how loop inversion should be modeled in the abstract world where we're just considering these statements as arbitrary statements in it, con, body and step. So before I do that, let me say that it is very easy to basically see that once you're able to identify the structure, then you can easily say, okay, let me unroll the loop a little bit and put the first few iterations with the initialization. And so I can kind of remove some iterations of the loop and kind of put them just outside the loop. And this kind of transformation is called loop peeling. All right, so what is loop peeling? Well, here's an example of loop peeling. I kind of took these three statements, con, body and step, and just created a copy of them here, right? Now created a copy of them, and then I kind of pasted the loop again. And so I claim that the program on the right is equivalent to the program on the left because in both cases I do in it, then I check con, then if it's false, then I exit the loop, all right? If it's true, then I execute the body, then I execute the step, and then I check con again, but in this case, I just go back to check the con again. So I have kind of peeled, sorry, the word is peeled, the first iteration of the loop, right? So it's like, it's a loop, I just peeled the first iteration and put it before the header of the loop, in the pre-header of the loop, all right? So this is, you know, I just put it after the init, and now this part is not a part of the loop. Now this is called loop peeling. Now once again, to implement loop peeling, we need to understand the structure of the loop, just like we had to understand the structure of the loop to implement loop inversion. And we're going to, you know, there are many situations where loop peeling is going to actually result in a speed up, and we're going to see examples of that later. But first thing I want to point out that even loop inversion is just a special form of loop peeling, because in loop inversion, we are just peeling out some parts of the first iteration, not the entire, so in this example, I have peeled out the entire first iteration, which includes cond, body, and step. What if I just peeled out the cond and not body and step? Then I would have got loop inversion. So how does that work? Loop inversion is a special case of loop peeling. I just peeled out cond, and that's all, right? So I just kind of created two copies of cond. First is outside the loop, and the other is inside the loop, just like before. And also because of that, the cond is now, you know, so cond is now moved at the end of the loop, because it's like, it's a circular thing. If I pick one out, then the other, you know, the one from the next iteration just moves to the bottom of the loop. In the previous slide, I had pulled the entire iteration out, so the loop looked identical. In this inversion case, I just pulled one component of the first iteration out, and so that component's copy inside the loop now moves to the end of the loop. And so this is what the new loop looks like. Say init, then you do the condition, just like you would have done in the original program. If it's false, you exit. If it's true, then you execute the body in both the cases. Then you execute the step in both the cases. And in this case, you would have done an extra branch to get back to the cond. Here, you don't need the extra branch. You just do the cond because of the fall through of the program. And then if the cond is true, then you jump back to the body. Otherwise, you jump to the exit. So functionally, these two programs are equivalent. Structurally, they are slightly different. In one case, I have basically peeled out one condition check of the first iteration of the loop outside. And I'm claiming that this is exactly, I mean, this kind of transformation is nothing but loop inversion, okay? So let's go back to our original example. In our original example, this was the original code control flow graph. T equals M plus N. No, so this was the original code program. I equals zero, I is less than N, AI equals T. And this is basically the inverted version. And in the inverted version, what I have done is, if this is, you know, in this code, this is the initialization. This is the condition. And this is the step. And now, in the transform program, I again do initialization first. Then I do condition. But I have just put the condition outside the loop. Then I execute the body. Then I do the condition again. So I have created two copies of the condition. That's what I have done. And then if the condition is true, I go back to the loop. And if the condition is false, I jump out of the loop. I go to exit of the loop. Also, I think I forgot to also draw an exit from the first condition. Now, you may say, oh, the condition was I is less than N. How did you get zero is less than N? Well, that, you know, you could have just, I just kind of omitted a step. You could have said I is less than N here too. Just that I, you know, now that I have peeled out this, it's very easy to see that I can constant propagate I, because at this particular location, in the transform code, I is definitely a constant. And so I can just replace I with zero. And so that becomes zero is less than N. And that's exactly the code that we have on the right. So zero is less than N, just translates to N is greater than zero. I should point out that loop inversion is a very, very common transformation, because A, it saves a branch in the loop body. And we have already discussed that saving even a single instruction in the loop body may mean saving millions of instructions overall. And second, it is actually applicable to all loops, right? Because firstly, most of us write loops in this way, humans write loops in this way, whereas this is the more optimized implementation of the same loop. And notice that this transformation is not making any assumptions about what the loop is. For example, it doesn't need any kind of properties that N should be a constant or I, you know, there should be this structure to the loop, or this is how the value should be used. Almost every loop that has this structure can be transformed to this structure. And that is what typically modern compilers also do. And so loop inversion is a very, very common transformation. To summarize, optimizations that make a loop faster are usually very consequential. And so much effort has gone into this. And we are going to study some of these efforts to understand what is the state of the art in trying to optimize loops.
