Title: Compiler Design Module 127 : Blocking in Matrix Multiplication
Video ID: EqkDgVkMjwI
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

So, last time we were discussing the matrix multiplication example and we saw what is the best and the worst case performance in terms of cache misses when we execute a naive implementation. And recall that a naive implementation basically iterates over the rows from i equals 0 to n, then iterates over the columns for each row for j equals 0 to n and then for each jth element, it again iterates over k such that k iterates over the rows of the first matrix A and the columns of the second matrix B and it performs this operation Cij plus equals Aik into Bkj. And we basically analyzed that what is the performance of a matrix multiplication routine that's written such that cache misses which form the bulk of the runtime because a cache miss basically means going all the way to memory that can take tens to hundreds of cycles. We basically counting the number of cache misses and we said that the number of cache misses can be as low as order n square and as high as order n cube for large matrices. And typically we will be concerning ourselves with large matrices because that's what is the common case where we basically trying to multiply large matrices with each other. There are many applications of matrix multiplication with large matrices, one of the most recent being the deep neural networks where basically you want to multiply the weight matrix with the input matrix and things like that. So here is the diagrammatic representation of what the loop for matrix multiplication, the naive implementation that we saw in the previous slide. For the ijth element of C, we basically iterate k over the row of A, over the ijth row of A and k over the jth column of B. And we said that one of them is going to have some spatial locality. For example, A can have high spatial locality assuming row major format and B would have very low spatial locality assuming row major format and so most of the misses will be dominated by B and if the arrays are big enough then the number of, it will basically be a cache miss for every axis of B. And from that we basically get order n cube cache misses in B. So every axis of B is a cache miss and because there are order n cube accesses so there will be order n cube cache misses. So we want to improve the situation. This is not a very good situation. We have some cache which is fast memory available close to the CPU but it is being underutilized. There are so many cells there that are not being utilized. Those cells are only being used to cache the elements of A but because of low spatial locality and low temporal locality, the elements of B are not getting cached and so overall that's causing a degradation in the performance of our matrix multiplication loop. So how can we fix the solution? So here's one important observation and the observation is that it doesn't really matter what is the order in which I perform this computation. This computation of adding, multiplying the elements of A and B and then adding it to the element of C. So we can do partial dot products in one go before moving to another C ij for better cache utilization. And what do I mean? That would be more clear with this figure. So instead of looking at just one element of C ij, let me just do a bunch of elements in this square of C ij. So instead of C ij, let me also do the partial dot products not the full dot products for elements around C ij. So from let's say I introduce a new iteration of a variable ii. So ii iterates from, you know, so ii is the beginning and ii plus b is the end and now I would iterate from ii to ii plus b. Similarly I go from jj to jj plus b using j and in one go I compute the partial dot product of this entire square of cells, right? So the number of cells in the square is b into b, b rows and b columns and so it's order b square cells and I basically do the partial dot product of these b square cells before I move to the next block of b square cells. So instead of doing the full dot product of one element, how about I do the partial dot product of a block of elements where the block is of size b square elements in one go and when I do this then k is going to iterate from ii to ii plus b because that's what the rows are iterating from and similarly in b it would iterate from jj to jj plus b but for k it's going to iterate from kk to kk plus b. So not only do I block the elements of C ij but I also block the elements of aik and bkj, right? Which means that and that's why I call it a partial dot product. I don't iterate kk all the way from 0 to n but I iterate k from kk to kk plus b, right? On the columns and of a and similarly kk to kk plus b on the rows of b. So I iterate k from kk to kk plus b both on the columns of a and rows of the second matrix. I'm calling it b. Notice that the matrix b and the blocking factor b are two different b's. I'm writing them in different colors. So notice that we have reordered the iteration space significantly because the order of iterations does not matter in this case. Why does it not matter? Because addition is commutative and associative. So I can do these additions in any order and so that's what that's what I'm exploiting to make my matrix multiplication routine faster and because the order of iterations does not matter this remains correct, right? So I can compute the partial dot product of this block of elements for this block using this block and this block and then keep doing this until I have covered all the blocks and thus I have covered all the elements. So we're at a very high level. This is what my code is going to look like. Instead of a single multiply which was cij equals cij plus ai k into bkj. I'm going to do a block multiply from c of ii jj to aii kk and cii jj to aii, so I should have corrected this, this is ii kk and bkk jj, okay? So that's what I want to do. I want to do a block multiply where I'm going to do compute partial dot products for the block of elements of size B square, capital B square which is B is in red from starting from ii, jj to ii plus b, jj plus b and I'm going to do the partial dot products using elements from aii kk block at aii kk and block at bkk jj, right? So this is the full code. Now my loop nest becomes a depth 6 loop nest where the inner loop nest which is drawn in green is basically implementing my block multiply and what it's doing is it's iterating i from ii to ii plus b, iterating j from jj to jj plus b and iterating k also from kk to kk plus b. So I have blocked all the three variables i, j and k and then I do cij plus equals cai k into bkj and so this operation here is doing a partial dot product for the block specified by kk in from ii kk to kk jj, right? In a and b respectively. So this is what my loop is going to look like and once again this is correct because I have only reordered the computation. At the end of the day this particular statement is going to get executed for every possible pair of i, j and k for every possible tuple of i, j and k. If I look at the space of i it is still 0 to n for every possible value just reordered it. For example ii is now iterating from 0 to n with a step of b. Similarly j is iterating from 0 to n with a step of b and k is iterating from 0 to n with a step of b and then these smaller variables i, j and k are iterating within these steps with a step of 1 within the b size big step with smaller steps of size 1. Okay so overall this instruction this statement cij plus equals ai k into a pkj gets executed exactly once for every triple i, j and k for belonging to the space of 0 0 0 to n n n excluding you know n minus 1 n minus 1 n minus 1 to be more precise and and this is getting executed for all these elements and I've just reordered the computation and so but the final result of the computation is guaranteed to be identical. I've just reordered the computation the amount of computation is still exactly the same but this new reordering is giving me better cache locality if I choose my capital B judiciously alright and I how would I like to choose my capital B I would like to choose my capital B so that all this computation that's happening in green which is part of the block multiply routine can be served largely from the cache and so if I basically choose my capital B such that all these three arrays of size b square plus b square plus b square all these three sub arrays or sub matrices fit in the cache and then we if they do then what we are going to do is notice that this whole green block here is involving n cube computations or b cube computations but they only require b square data because it's just b square data that needs to be touched it's a ik b kj and c ij and so we basically going from each block is needs to be is of size b square and so we have three b square amount of data that is being computed on and the amount of computation that I'm doing on that data is order n cube because we have a three loop nest in this green portion of the code so we are performing b cube computations on three b squared data and if all this three b square data can fit in cache then I would just pay three b square cache misses while I would have done b cube computation recall that in my original code if my arrays were large then I would have had to do n cube misses for n cube computation now I'm going to be doing b square or 3b square misses for b cube computation so I have made an improvement in the number of cache misses and so if L is the cache line size the number of misses to get a block into the cache is b squared by L because b squared is the size of a block and L is the size of a cache line size assuming spatial locality we're basically going to access one one element we're going to get the whole cache line so for the other elements of the this b square block we won't have to go through we won't have to pay cache misses all right so I'm assuming that all these b square elements have spatial locality which they do because irrespective of whether I have row major format or column major format assuming capital B is greater than the cache line size then there is a lot of spatial locality because element if you element access some element then it brings the entire cache line and those cache line set of elements are going to be accessed very close in time in our green part of the code which is part of the block multiply and because there are three such arrays I also put a three such blocks that I'm doing inside the inner block multiply I basically also multiply this by 3 and so that's 3b square by L but I'm just going to call that b square by L because that's the order of the amount of count cache misses that I have also recall that some of these cache misses will be less problematic because they will have their own spatial locality and others would be more problematic just like we were doing for then when we were discussing for the naive implementation for example B has low spatial and temporal locality on the other hand A has higher spatial locality and so on so let's say that b square by L is the number of misses to get a block into the cache of A B and C arrays or matrices and number of times we need to bring a block into cache now what about the outer loop so the outer loop still does not have enough cache locality and but the outer loop is now only going to execute n by b times for each of the loop nest lines and so that gives me n by b whole cube so this is just following from our original reasoning the original live implementation was giving me an cache miss for every access and that was the order n cube now this is the outer loop is going to give me a cache miss for the entire block on every access to that block how many blocks are there there are n by b n by b times for every line and so this is going to be how many times am I going to have to bring a block into the cache that's n by b whole cube so what is the number of total cache misses this is number of times I need to bring a block into the cache which is n by b whole cube this is the number of misses that I pay to bring a block into the cache because once I bring a block into the cache then I can basically do some competition on that so that's b squared by L and so the total number of misses that I pay is n by b whole cube into b squared by L and that gives me n cubed by b L now this is a big improvement over what we had earlier earlier we had order n cube misses for the naive implementation but now I have order n cubed by b L misses b is coming from our blocking factor which is the size of a block one dimension of our two dimensional block and L is coming from the cache line now it may seem counterintuitive that we also we have you know dividing by b seems reasonable because we are doing the blocking by that factor but why is there a factor of L that's coming in and that's because because of the blocking that we are doing we have also improved the spatial locality of accesses to the array b and because of that the cache line spatial locality that's built in the hardware also starts playing up and giving us the advantage and so overall we get an order b L reduction in my number of cache misses this is a significant reduction for example if I have L1 cache and I use a block factor of b equals 8 so that should give me an order of at least 8x and more reduction in my number of cache misses and in fact I can do blocking at multiple layers of the cache hierarchy so for example my cache hierarchy today in modern machines has multiple layers for example I could have an L1 cache, L2 cache, L3 cache and then the main memory and these have all have different sizes and different access latencies and depending on the size of the cache and the access latencies of the of the respective cache I can choose a different blocking factor b for each of the cache also the cache line size matters so for example I could use a blocking factor b of 8 for L1, 80 for L2 and so on and when I use different blocking factors for different levels of cache what does this mean it means that I actually am increasing the loopless depth so in my previous slide I showed you a blocking implementation that had a loopness depth of 6 because I had an inner loop which was doing a block multiply but now if I do blocking at multiple levels let's say for L1 and L2 separately then my loopness depth would become 9 the second triple of loopness is going to be for let's say L2 and the innermost loopness would be for L1 and so I can although the size of my code has increased from a triple loopness to a 6 loopness to a 9 loopness my performance has improved because I have saved on the number of cache misses at that particular level of the cache hierarchy notice that the value of b is sensitive to this nature size and associativity of your cache and needs to be chosen in a appropriate manner depending on the machine that is going to run on so in practice blocking improves runtime by a factor of around 3 on a modern uniprocessor machine now this may seem surprising to you in my previous slide I had said that if I use a blocking factor of b then I should basically have an improvement of b into L in terms of cache misses but and if b is 8 then why do I have an improvement of only 3x well it's because the Amdahl's law kicks in recall that the Amdahl's law says that the performance is limited by the performance or the runtime of the slowest part of your code and so once you make the caches faster or cache is more effective there are other parts of the code which include the competition lower levels of the cache hierarchy and so on that become the bottleneck but even a 3x improvement in performance is a huge improvement based on this method of blocking this whole optimization transformation that I described is also called blocking and it's a very popular transformation not just for matrix multiplication but for other types of computations where computation can be reordered recall that we are basically relying on this fact that we can completely reorder this computation and that's what we have been doing to implement blocking finally we last time discussed how even if you parallelize a naive implementation of a matrix multiplication loop across p processors then we still have order n cubed misses at the main memory and if the main memory is has does not have enough parallelism then basically we won't be able to fully utilize you know the parallelism available in the processing level because at the processor level they are all going all the way to the main memory and that's where the bottleneck is so even and the processors will mostly be idle just waiting for main memory and so even though I have p processors the performance improvement that I get by row by row parallelization would not be much but now with blocking we can now again do row by row parallelization so we can you know for example after we have this six loop nest implementation blocking implementation of matrix multiply I can do a row by row parallelization of the six loop nest for the top level loop and then I can expect that I can expect actually the similar behavior but this time each of these CPUs each of these p CPUs would have their own caches and each of those caches would basically be able to utilize all the cells in those caches on the lines and the caches using blocking and so the main memory much of the main memory content of the arrays a b and c would actually be residing in the respective caches of these p processors so as you increase the number of processors with the blocking implementation you are also improving the size of the effective cache let's say the L1 cache so every CPU would have its own L1 cache and so effectively with p processors the size of L1 cache also becomes p into gets amplified by a factor of p and that basically eventually gives you speed up that are linear in the number of processors p so with my original implementation the naive implementation the memory was becoming a bottleneck and even though I was parallelizing across p processors my performance was not scaling with p it was just you know getting bottleneck at the main memory but with blocking I'm now able to use the caches and increase my effective cache size across p processors by a factor of p and overall that typically gives you speed ups that are linear in the number of processors and this again is a big improvement because of blocking it gives you better scalability of your matrix multiplication routine
