Title: Compiler Design Module 73 : Local Optimizations
Video ID: bS5otSEVBRo
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

Now we're going to look at local optimizations in more detail. Recall that local optimizations are optimizations that can be performed by looking at a basic block in isolation. So this is the simplest form of isolation and it optimizes one basic block at a time and no need to analyze the whole procedure body. 

So here's one example of local optimization, elimination of no ops, all right? So by no ops, I mean instructions that basically have no effect, no operation. So some statements, like the following, can be deleted. For example, X is assigned X plus zero. Now this is a no op because it's really not making any difference to the program and so we can remove this. Or similarly, X equals X into one or X equals X logical or zero. So these are all instructions that basically are not making any difference whatsoever and so they can be just eliminated, right? 

Okay, some statements can be simplified by using algebraic properties of the operators. For example, if I have X equals X into zero, then I can replace it with X equals zero. Now this is interesting because here, this was an arithmetic operation but now I have replaced it with a constant on the right hand side. And so this means that anywhere that X is being used and this definition is reaching that use, then that X can be replaced with zero and this is something that we call constant propagation and we're going to see that in our next slide. So no, it's not just the fact that we have eliminated one star, one multiplication operator, but also because of this, we have enabled constants to be propagated in the rest of the program. Also, Y equals X star star two. Here this double star is supposed to mean exponents, the exponent operator. So this basically means Y equals X square and this can be replaced with Y equals X multiplied with X. Now why is this a simplification or an optimization? Well, because many architectures will provide the exponent operator in their op codes but it will typically be more expensive than let's say the multiplication operator. And so in this case, if the exponent was just two, then it will be cheaper to do multiplication than to actually execute the exponentiation circuit inside the hardware or the software wherever it has been implemented. Similarly, you can have X equals X into eight. Now, once again, this is a multiplication and I can replace this with a left shift of three. Once again, the idea is that executing a multiplication would typically be more expensive in hardware or in software than just implementing a shift because the shift is just a shift register where the multiplication is a complex arithmetic circuit. Or I could have X equals X into 15 and once again, this is a multiplication operator and depending on the machine, it may be actually cheaper to replace it with two instructions. So sometimes you want to replace one instruction with two instructions provided as the sum of those two instructions. The sum of the cost of those two instructions is smaller than the sum cost of the original instruction. In this case, what you can do is you can first shift X by four to the left. So that's equivalent to basically multiplying it by 16 and then just subtracting X from it. So T equals X left shift by four and then X equals T minus X. So these are some algebraic simplifications that you can do to rewrite code and some of these rewrites are likely to give you performance improvements and once again, these performance improvements are a function of the underlying architecture on which we are executing. So for example, some architecture may implement really fast multiplication in which case this last rule is not going to be a meaningful optimization but some other architecture may, it may be a meaningful optimization. 

All right, the next optimization that we're going to look at is called constant folding. It's also known as constant propagation. So what's constant propagation or constant folding? Well, if you have an instruction in your program which looks like X is assigned Y operation Z for some operation OP and Y and Z are both constants then this statement can be computed at compile time because they're just constants you don't need to compute them at runtime. Recall that compilation is just a partial evaluation of the interpreter and so why to interpret it at runtime why not just partially evaluate these values at compile time and so at compile time you can compute Y OP Z and then just replace this whole instruction with a constant assignment. So for example, if it's X equals two plus two then I can just say X equals four, all right? Or similarly if I have, if two is less than zero, jump L, this can be just eliminated, right? Because I know that two is less than zero is just false and so I'm pretty sure that this instruction will never jump to L, it will just fall through forever and so this instruction can be just eliminated. Or another example, if two is greater than zero then jump L and so this is just going to be always true because two is always greater than zero and then I could just jump L. Now I want to point out here that constant propagation is basically the idea that once you have X equals four then if subsequently we have if X is less than zero because we know that by this time we know that all paths that reach here are going to put X equals four then I can just replace X by four and then kind of do the constant folding. So constant propagation and constant folding are actually different optimizations but they're very related optimizations because propagation is about propagating constants through the program, folding is about using the constant values to make the, to do the computation at compile time. 

Here's another type of optimization is called dead code elimination. So what is dead code? Code that is unreachable from the initial block. So example, a CFG node which has no incoming edges. All right, so node has no incoming edges basically means that this node can never be reached during the execution of the method body except the initial node which will be always executed when the method body executes but except the initial node if there's any other node in the CFG which does not have any incoming edges then that would be dead code. And we can eliminate that node and maybe because of eliminating that node all its successes, all the nodes that were being pointed to by this node are also becoming dead and so on and so dead code elimination is typically has a cascading effect on other nodes in the CFG. What is the advantage of such elimination? Well, removing unreachable code actually makes the program smaller and so of course it is a code size improvement but often it also makes the code faster and this may be counter-intuitive but the reason here is because of caching effects. Because the code becomes smaller it can now start fitting more into the cache and so you can have fewer cache misses and so you will have more faster runtime. 

Okay, but then why would such unreachable blocks occur? Well, actually dead code occurs a lot in practice so one basic very common reason that it can occur is for example in C you have these macros like debug or whatever macro you want to define and maybe let's say in my program I define debug to be zero for my actual run which is going to go into production and then in my code I have basically some if then else statements say if debug then print this, this, this, this, right? Now because debug is zero that's just a flag that the programmer is using all this code that is going in the if body is just dead, right? And so how do I figure this out? Well, I'll need to first do constant propagation which basically means that wherever debug is being used I'm going to put zero there and then I'm going to do constant folding so I'm going to say if zero then everything else is basically then jump to L that statement will go away so I'm going to remove this particular statement here and then whatever was in the body of L so whatever L was basically representing all that now becomes dead code because nobody's pointing to it anymore because the conditional branch that was pointing to it has been eliminated due to constant folding and so that becomes dead code and that can be now removed so it's basically constant propagation, constant folding followed by dead code elimination. 

Why would unreachable blocks occur? Here's another reason why unreachable blocks occur so when you link a library let's say I link the C library or I link the SSL library it will have let's say hundreds of functions but maybe my program is only using two or three of the functions and so the other 97 functions are just lying there idle and so they are just dead code because they don't have any incoming edge nobody's really calling them and so because nobody's calling them that's all dead code and the compiler can potentially eliminate them. So usually often other optimizations also result in dead code we already saw an example where constant folding and constant propagation resulted in dead code and we're going to see more examples where other optimizations basically result in dead code. 

Here's another type of optimization which is called common sub-expression elimination. Here's an example to show what it means. So you say if there's a statement says x is y plus z and then there's some other code and say w is y plus z. Now notice that the same expression y plus z that's being computed here then I can potentially replace it with x equals y plus z remains intact everything else remains intact but w now can be assigned just x and that's it we don't need to recompute y plus z. Well is this always possible to two? What am I assuming here? Well, I'm assuming for example that x is not modified in the middle. I'm also assuming that y and z are not modified. Right? And so I'm basically assuming that in this area x and y and z are not modified only then I can make this transformation and so I will need to check that and that's one big advantage of the SSA IR form so if this was in SSA IR so by the way all the optimization that we've discussed so far could be either in SSA or in non-SSA it doesn't matter. SSA is just an extra restriction over the program that there can be only one assignment to any variable in the static program and so if it was SSA then I can be 100% sure I don't even need to check anything that x, y and z are not modified because y and z already have values in the first instruction here and so in the static program they cannot be modified and similarly x cannot be modified because by the property of SSA these variables should only be modified once. All right? 

So SSA IR makes more values available so even if let's say x was modified in the middle somewhere but then SSA format would have basically renamed them to different versions so this would have become x1 and this would have become x2 and now it would have been okay to say w equals x1 so recall that one of the big advantages of SSA form was that there were more values that were becoming available at every program point and that's also being seen here. Here both x1 and x2 are becoming available and one of them now becomes a candidate for common sub-expression elimination. So what is the common sub-expression that has been eliminated in this example? It is y plus z, all right? So y plus z is the common sub-expression that has been eliminated. Also this is a good property of the three address code, right? It's easy to identify these common sub-expressions. In the three address code, basically on the right hand side I just have two operands and one operator and so I can just check whether there's any other instruction that also has the same operands and the same operator and it's easy to check common sub-expressions in this way. 

Okay, now let's take another example of common sub-expression elimination. Let's say my original code was x equals y plus z, w equals y plus three and there's some code in the middle. Then there's some other code and then there's a v equals y plus z and there's a u equals v plus three. Now the first thing here is that, let's assume that this is SSA form and so the first thing I can do is I can see, oh, this is y plus z, this is y plus z, so this is a common sub-expression and so I can potentially eliminate the second expression, which is y plus z and so I can make that v equals x, right? I'm assuming SSA form here. Okay, so now that I do v equals x, now am I done or can I do more? Actually if you look at it, v equals x and then u equals v plus three, v plus three is the same as x plus three because v is equal to x and so I could have potentially done u equals w but then how do I do this algorithmically? What's the right way to do it algorithmically? And so for that we need one other kind of transformation which is called copy propagation. 

So what is copy propagation? Well, it's a very simple idea. If in our code we ever have a copy, by a copy I mean a statement of the form w is colon equal to x, right? So w has been assigned the value x. It's just a copy. There's no operation being performed, it's just a copy and often copies are created because of common sub-expression elimination as we saw in our last example. Then we replace all subsequent uses of w with x and we eliminate this statement. For example, in this particular code we had v equals x, u equals v plus three. Now this is a copy and I can eliminate the copy and propagate it by just removing this and replacing the v by x everywhere where it follows. And so the new code basically looks like the one on the right-hand side where I just said u equals x plus three. What is the advantage of copy propagation? Well, we have removed one copy which was unnecessary. We have also gotten rid of one temporary variable. So when we actually do code generation to the actual architecture where there are finite number of registers, recall in our IR we are assuming infinite number of registers. So when we actually do that then we will have to use fewer registers because now we have fewer temporary registers. And also, because of the copy propagation we can now find more common sub-expressions. So notice that there's this nice cyclic dependency. Because of common sub-expression elimination some copies were created. Because of those copies copy propagation was possible and because of copy propagation again some more common sub-expressions were identified. In this case, the new common sub-expressions are x plus three. And so one of these common sub-expressions can be eliminated. The second one. And so this can be basically replaced by just u equals w. And now we have yet another opportunity for doing copy propagation. So it's almost like one optimization is helping the other and then that optimization is helping the first one and so on and so forth. And there's almost like a nice interplay of these optimizations. 

So I'm not going to work out this example but I have some example on the left which has one, two, three, four, five, six, seven instructions or seven statements. And then if I optimize it using all the rules that I have discussed so far, all the optimization strategies like common sub-expression elimination, copy propagation, dead code elimination, constant folding, constant propagation, algebraic simplification and the no-up elimination. If I keep doing all these things then I'm going to eventually end up with this particular code on the right. Okay, and notice that this code has only three statements. A equals X into X, F equals A plus A and G equals six into F. Now, here's an interesting thing. This A plus A is probably coming due to algebraic simplification because somewhere I must have used the rule that if you have two into A then you should replace it with A plus A, right? Because maybe addition is cheaper on my machine than multiplication, which it typically is. And so it's a good thing to replace a multiplication with two with an addition, right? However, now we have a problem because now that I have A plus A here, I cannot do anything more with it. On the other hand, if I just had retained two into A, right, so if I had retained two into A and just said F equals two into A, then I had an opportunity of doing constant propagation and folding because I could have said, oh, F equals two into A, G equals six into F. So that's just six into two into A and that's just 12 into A, right? And so I could have replaced six into F with 12 into A and if F was not being used anywhere else later on, then I could have just eliminated F, this statement I've just gotten with two statements. So we have a problem of a local minima. We just apply these rules in some haphazard manner and while you're applying these rules, sometimes because of the applying of the rules, some other optimizations became enabled, but sometimes because of applying some rules, some other optimizations became disabled. So for example, this algebraic simplification from two into A to A plus A disabled constant propagation for us. And so this is a problem of local minima. While we were really searching for the optimal program, we are not really, our algorithms are not designed to find the optimal answer. They're just basically trying something and maybe they can get stuck in a local minima. So yeah, this is what could have happened if I had F equals two into A, then I could have just replaced G equals six into F with 12 into A and maybe this statement F equals two into A would now become dead code because of the constant propagation because F is not getting used anywhere and now I could have removed this particular statement because it would have become a new one. Okay, and that could have been a better option, but we can start in a local minima. 

So to summarize, each local optimization does little by itself. It's just looks like a very small thing, small change, but often these optimizations interact. Usually performing one optimization enables the other optimization, but sometimes performing one optimization may disable other optimizations as well and we have seen examples of both. For example, constant propagation was enabling copy propagation and vice versa, whereas algebraic simplification was disabling constant propagation. Optimizing compilers can be thought of as a big bag of tricks. So today's optimizing compilers are basically just a bunch of these tricks and these tricks are just applied one after another. Also, there is some heuristic orderings on what to apply after what and there's sometimes some small search things where you would do backtracking and try this and then come back and try something else and so on, but there's nothing optimal about the way these things are organized. They're just supposed to work for the common cases, but you can always construct examples where they'll work suboptimally and get stuck in a local minima. 

Typical structure of a compiler, optimizing compiler, repeat, repeatedly apply an optimization rule until no improvement is possible. So until there's no improvement that's possible, you just keep repeatedly applying it. Typically in practice, this loop is not run till infinity, but more like a fixed number of iterations so that you bound the compilation time as well. So what is the guarantee that this loop will converge, which means it will terminate. What's the, why can't it just go on forever? It's possible, it can keep oscillating between this and that and this and that and the reason we can, one way to kind of guarantee convergence is to ensure that all transformations are going in a particular direction of improvement of the metric. So for example, if you are improving runtime, then you may have some notion of what has what runtime and then every time you're making a transformation, you're only going in one direction of that improvement. You're only reducing the runtime. And so if you're just reducing, you can never oscillate because you can never come back and increase the runtime. For oscillation, you will have to have a cycle and that won't never happen. One way to ensure convergence is that you basically ensure that all your transformations are just monotonic. They're just taking the program from a higher metric value of the metric to the lower value of the metric. Metric could be your chosen quantity of choice, right? For example, execution time, code size or whatever you like. What is the guarantee that this procedure is going to be optimal? None. Okay, so there's no optimality guarantee. We already saw examples where this kind of procedure can get stuck in local minimas and we're just going to say, okay, we are done, whereas there could have been more things that were possible.
