Title: Compiler Design Module 146 : Solving Space Partitioning Constraints in General
Video ID: XCH5bAT_wTw
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

Now that we have seen how one could go about solving the space partitioning constraints in the context of a particular example, in this module, we are going to discuss the generalization that algorithm of solving space partitioning constraints. So recall that these are what space partitioning constraints look like. It says that whenever there is a data dependency for any pair of accesses or statements, in other words, whenever f1 i1 plus small f1 for statement one equals f2 i2 plus small f2 for statement two, then it must be true that those two both iterations points, i1 comma i2 map to the same processor ID. In other words, c1 i1 plus small c1 equals c2 i2 plus small c2. Now notice that I have kind of condensed the space partitioning constraints. The actual space partitioning constraints also include things like b1 i1 plus b small b1 greater than equal to zero and so on. But notice from the solution that we had in our previous module for that example, actually ignored those inequalities and we just use the equalities to arrive at a solution. Now it's not necessarily true that you can always ignore the inequalities. For example, if the inequalities evaluate only to a single point or evaluate to only a zero point, no points at all or something like that, then those inequalities are meaningful. But if the inequality is basically defined a large space, then it's the equality, which is basically really constraining the space. And so that's what's meaningful in identifying a solution. Also notice that inequalities are basically, getting rid of the inequality is not making my solution unsound or incorrect because even if I get rid of the inequalities, basically saying that, so it was recall that the inequalities were a part of the if clause. So now I have basically made the problem even more difficult now because I'm saying that whenever this is true, then this must be true. Earlier I was saying whenever this is true and some other conditions, which were the inequalities, then this should be true. So earlier I was saying that this should be true, the then clause should be true for a smaller set. Now I'm saying that the then clause should be true for a bigger set because in the if condition, I have removed some extra constraints. And so the solution that I'm going to get for this is always going to be a solution for the original space partitioning constraints as well. But we don't really, in our solution, we are not going to use typically the inequalities. And so I've just taken the liberty to ignore them in this particular formulation of the constraints. The good thing about this formulation is that these are all equalities and now I can use linear algebra techniques to basically solve this set of constraints exactly like we solved it for the example in our previous module. So now there's another way to write F1 I1 plus small i1 and that method is basically that whatever is capital F1, it's a matrix, but I'm just writing it as a single symbol here. And then you just append small f1 as a single column, which is actually a vector. So just append that as a column and make this an extended matrix, which is formed by appending all the columns of F1 with the single column of small f1. And then the vector just becomes I1 and one, right? So now if you just read this, this becomes F1, if you take the dot product, it becomes F1 I1 plus small f1 into one. So that's F1 I1 plus small f1. And similarly, I have done the similar transformation on the RHS as well. Now it is meaningful to kind of use this notation as opposed to the previous notation because we're going to do a lot of matrix kind of operations and becomes easier to talk in this notation rather than the previous notation. But eventually they all mean the same thing. So whenever this is true, it must be true that C1 I1 plus small c1 equals C2 I2 plus small c2, okay? And so in other words, I can also in fact, rewrite this constraint by just bringing this RHS on the LHS on the if clause. And now I can write this as a single vector, I1 followed by I2, it's a single column, which has rows, first they have rows corresponding to the iteration vector I1 for statement S1. Then it has all the rows for iteration vector I2 for statement S2. And then there's one which is just coming from the one that we had introduced in the previous slide. And because I moved the RHS to the LHS, I'll have the coefficient of minus one for all the elements that were originally on the RHS. So I have capital F1, which is going to get multiplied by small i1 followed by minus capital F2, which is going to get multiplied by small i2. And then I have small f1 minus small f2, which is going to get multiplied by one because that's the common coefficient, a common variable, a common unit in all for others. For example, I1 and I2 are completely distinct because they represent two different iteration indices. Even if there was the same statement, they're basically supposed to represent different iteration indices, for example, i and i prime, j and j prime and stuff like that. So I1 and I2 are different, but one is common. And so the coefficients for one just get combined into F1 minus F2, but F1 is one set of columns, defines one set of columns and minus F2 defines another set of columns. And we order them in such a way so that I1 is the first set of rows in my iteration, in my new vector that I've formed in the combined vector of I1 and I2 followed by I2, which is the next set of rows followed by one. Okay, so this is another way to write the if clause. And so now my equation becomes, if this is true, then it must be true that c1 i1 plus c2 i2 equals, c1 i1 plus c1, small c1 equals c2 i2 plus small c2. Now, once I have this, what I can do is I can use Gaussian elimination to eliminate as many unknown variables in I1 and I2 as possible. Now, this is what we did in our example as well. Recall that we had equations like i equals i prime, j equals j prime minus one and so on. And so when I know that i equals i prime, I can just eliminate i prime and replace it with i everywhere. Similarly, if I know that j equals j prime minus one, then I can eliminate j prime and replace it with j plus one everywhere. And so that's what I mean by use Gaussian elimination to eliminate as many unknown variables in I1, I2, which could be i, j, et cetera, or i prime, j prime, et cetera, as possible. Okay, and so when you, after you eliminate as many variables as possible based on these equalities that we know, then what we are left with is the number of free variables that can take on any value, right? Which are unconstrained because, for example, if I say i equals i prime, then if I represent i prime in terms of i, then i can take any value, but whatever value i takes, i prime must be the same value. And so if I say i equals i prime, and I use Gaussian elimination to eliminate i prime, then what I have remaining is just i, which is a free variable, and i prime has just been eliminated. So similarly, I have eliminated some variables, and what I'm left with are the free variables. And so that's what we want to do. And this is the standard method of Gaussian elimination. And so, in other words, what I'm basically going to do based on this equation is I'm going to rewrite this equation or transform this equation into an equivalent equation, which looks like, represent the vector i1, i2, 1, which is formed by having all the rows of the vector i1, followed by all the rows of vector i2, and then the unit one, equals some matrix U, multiplied with a vector of unknown variables T, followed by one, okay? So this may seem confusing. Where has U come from? Where has T come from? But basically what I'm saying is that I have identified what is the vector space of i1, i2, 1, which satisfies this equation. And then what are the, if I, let's say it's a one dimensional vector space, then it's a one dimensional degree of freedom. So there's only one free variable. And so T is going to be a single free variable. And so that's what it means. And then U is the multiplier to obtain the original iteration variables from the single free variable T, okay? So I'm going to use an example to show what is U, what is T, and what is one. One is just one, but what is U and what is T, with the example that we had, something similar to the example that we had earlier. So let's say this particular equation, f1 minus f2, and f1 minus f2, i1, i2, 1, evaluates to this, these values. We have, you know, i1 is ij, i2 is i prime j prime, and ij, i prime j prime are scalars. Notice that I'm not underlining them. And then there's one. So this becomes my vector. And now capital F1 is 1, 0, 0, 2. Minus capital F2 is minus 1, 0, 0, minus 1. And f1 minus f2 is, let's say, 0, 1, okay? Now, so this is my, you know, this is my matrix that is formed with five columns and two rows. Why is capital F1 1, 0, 0, 2? Because maybe the axis was something like i, 2j, all right? So that's what 1, 0, 0, 2 indicates. Why is this minus 1, 0, 0, minus 1? Because the matrix F2 was based on the axis, let's say, i, j, or i prime, j prime. And so that's how minus 1, minus 1 coming. Minus because we are bringing the RHS into LHS, and 1, 1 because the original axis was i prime, j prime. And similarly, how is this 0, 1 coming? Because, you know, one of the axes was just i, 2j, let's say, and the other was, so on one of the dimensions, there was no additive constant, and on the other dimension, there was an additive constant. So, okay, and the difference between the two additive constants, that's because it's f1 minus f2. So maybe both of them had additive constant 0 on the first dimension, and maybe one of them had additive constant 1. The first one had 1, and the other one had 0, and that's why we get 0, 1, because it's the difference of the two additive constants. And then, this is my equation, and now I want to bring this to this form of ut1. So, you know, how do I simplify this into an expression which say, which represents i1, i21 in terms of ut1. We have already seen informally how this is going to work. We are going to say, oh, by the way, 1 into i, so I'm going to do the matrix vector multiplication, so 1 into i plus 0 into j plus minus 1 into i prime plus 0 into j prime plus 0 into 1 equals 0. It basically means the first row basically evaluates to i equals i prime, right? Because the coefficient of 1, i is 1, and coefficient of i prime is minus 1, and the coefficient of everything else is 0. Similarly, the second row evaluates to 2j equals j prime plus 1, okay? So these equations are very similar to the ones that we had seen in our previous example, in the previous module, just that I have represented them in this matrix vector multiplication form. And in this case, it's representing two different equations. Now, what did I do in my example? I just said, oh, let's represent i prime as just replace i prime with i, and replace j prime with 2 into j, let's say, or 2 into j minus 1, for example. And so that's what it's going to be. I'm going to say, you know, basically I'm going to say i1 equals something, i2 equals something. Basically, so if I have four unknowns, i, j, i prime, j prime, and I have two linearly independent equations on those four unknowns, what is the degree of freedom remaining? So four minus two, which is two, right? Because four was the original amount of freedom free variables. They were bound by two linearly independent equations. So that's four minus two, two. So I know that my dimension of p is going to be two. Now, notice that it's important that these two rows are linearly independent. If they were not linearly independent, then we would probably want to, then we will get a fewer number of linearly independent rows, which basically means larger number of free variables. For example, if the second row was exactly equal to the first row, then there's only one linearly independent row. So what matters is the rank of this matrix that we have created and not the actual number of rows because you can always kind of transform the matrix into a row echelon form where all the linearly dependent rows can become zero. And so in this case, these two, both these are independent rows and even the row echelon form, for example, is going to have two number of rows. Okay, anyway, so now that, you know, so that's what we want to do. And so how am I going to write this? Here is the solution, all right? So I'm going to say, I basically want to write i, j, i prime, j prime one. This is my vector in terms of a u and a t. And because I know that this is going to be, no, this is just basic Gaussian elimination, but I just want to make sure that you understand what we are talking about using the complete example. So t is going to have t1, t2, which are the two variables that are free variables that are remaining free variables because as I said, four minus two equals two, four original free variables, two constraints, so two remaining free variables. And then I represent the vector in terms of these two free variables. And I just choose, you know, t1 and t2 such that i equals t1 and j equals t2, right? Just like we were doing earlier. Basically in the previous example, we didn't use t1, t2, we just use i and j and we represented i prime and j prime in terms of i and j. Here I'm just, instead of calling them i and j, I'm calling them new variables t1 and t2. And I'm just saying, oh, by the way, i equals t1 and j equals t2. And now let's represent i prime and j prime also in terms of t1 and t2 and not in terms of i and j. So based on this, what I get is i equals one, zero, zero, zero, zero into t1, t2, one, okay? I think I had too many zeros. Actually, I don't need that many number of columns. It's just three columns, all right? So i equals one into t1 plus zero into t2 plus zero into one. So that's just saying i equals t1. J equals zero into t1 plus one into t2 plus zero into one. So that's just saying j equals t2. Similarly, i prime equals one into t1 plus zero into everything else. And so i prime also equals t1. So now this equation is encoding the fact that i prime equals i, because i equals t1 and i prime also equals t1. Similarly, j prime equals zero into t1 plus two into t2 plus zero into one. So that's basically saying j prime equals two into t2. Now actually this, I think once again, I've gotten this a little bit wrong because here I also had an additive constant here in my original equation, which was one. So j prime was equal to two j, two j minus j prime plus one was equal to zero. So two j plus one. So I should have basically had one here as well, all right? So j prime equals two t2 plus one. That's what I wanted to say. And so my fourth row here should have been zero to one to represent the fact that j prime equals zero t1 plus two t2 plus one, all right? And finally, one equals one. And so that's just the last row is not really meaningful, but for everything else, we have been able to write these iteration indices in terms of two free variables, t1 and t2. And this is important because now we have clearly delineated the free variables from the iteration indices. So number of iteration indices here was four, but the number of free variables is only two. And this is going to be useful because now when we are going to solve for our space partitioning constraints, we know that the degree of freedom is only two-dimensional or the space that we are solving for is a two-dimensional space and not a full four-dimensional space. I'll emphasize this again, the reduction from the four-dimensional space to the two-dimensional space was achieved using the data dependence equations, which are f1 i1 plus small f1 equals f2 i2 plus small f2. And so in this example, this whole matrix, this matrix of three columns and five rows forms U and this vector forms T, okay? All right, so now coming back to our generalization, I have been able to write these, the if clause of the space partitioning constraint or one of the space partitioning constraint or one pair of axes as i1 i2 1 equals some matrix U into some set of free variables T and a one row, single one scalar for the vector. Okay, so now that I have achieved this, what does it buy me? So now it basically means that I can rewrite my space partitioning constraints to say if U into T1 equals zero, then it must be true that c1 i1 plus, let me write that again, c1 i1 plus small c1 equals, so this is capital C1 and this is small c1 equals capital C2 i2 plus small c2. And so notice that the change here is that instead of writing that entire f1 i1 plus small f1 equals f2 i2 plus small f2, I'm basically writing it as U T1 equals zero for all T. And the important thing here is that the dimensionality of T is now smaller, either equal or typically smaller than the dimensionality of the original iteration space. The sum of the iteration space is i and i prime, or i1 and i2, okay? So that's what we have achieved so far. And now what I've done is I've just rewritten this c1 i1 plus small c1 equals c2 i2 plus small c2, exactly just brought everything to the left-hand side, added a one row just like we had done for f's, and this is what I get, capital C1, all the columns of capital C1 followed by all the columns of minus capital C2, and then the single column of vector C1 minus vector C2. Minus vector C2, multiplied with all the rows of i1 followed by all the rows of i2 followed by one equals zero. So this is just a rewrite of this, right? And now the good thing is I already know that i1 i2 1 can be written as U of T1. Sorry, this should have been i1 i2 1, I mean not z, so I've written this by zero. Okay, so now that I know that i1 i2 1 equals U T1, I can just replace it, substitute, okay? And so I get the original, the equation that we got is c1 minus c2 and small c1 minus small c2 into U into T1 equals zero. Okay, so I've been able to rewrite my space partitioning constraints in terms of U and T, and the important thing here is that the T is the minimum dimensional possible of three variables, considering that our data-dependent constraints, which are part of the space partitioning constraints, are true. Now, once I brought the equation into this form, T is a completely unhinged or unconstrained space of variables, and so this whole equation must be true for all T. And notice, unlike previous case where also I was saying for all i1 and i2, but i1 and i2 were constrained. Here, T is not constrained. I have, in fact, removed all the constraints from T, and in fact, T is basically the set of all the remaining three variables after you have removed the constraints that were coming through the data-dependent constraints. So this must hold for all T. And once I'm, and where T is completely unconstrained. So if this must hold for all T, then it must be true that this whole thing should be evaluating to zero, okay? Because, I mean, the only way this can hold for all possible T where T is unconstrained is if this whole thing evaluates to zero, and so that's what our space partitioning constraints have been reduced to. Now, I want to point out that there are many kind of steps in our solution of space partitioning constraints, and you may be wondering, oh, you're making so many approximations, but I will say all the approximations that we are making, such as getting rid of greater than equal to inequalities like d i plus small b, or here I'm making an approximation that if this is true for all possible T, then it must be true that the coefficient is zero. Now, this is basically, you may say, oh, what if small t was some inequality or something like that? All these approximations was bound by some inequality. So all these approximations are basically based on the fact that these are over approximations. So once I approximate, I'm sure that if the, if I find a solution to the approximate version, then that solution would always satisfy the original solution equation as well. I may get a more constrained solution than needed, but I'll never get an incorrect solution. And so any solution that basically says that this whole thing should be zero is going to satisfy the fact that this whole thing is zero for all possibility. Anything multiplied by zero is zero. And so if this is zero, then the whole thing is zero. And so that's what I have reduced the problem to. Once again, I want to point out that the trivial solution to this is that all the Cs are zero. And so that would work, but we are interested in finding the max rank solution such that this whole thing still evaluates to zero. And that's where we're going to rely on you to do that for us. So finally, we basically have, so let me just fix this. This was not zero. This was I1, I2, one. So basically now I've been able to reduce my solution to the fact that C1, capital C1 minus capital C2 and small c1 minus small c2 into U must be equal to zero. And here U is a set of known constants and the only unknowns in the equation now are capital C1, capital C2 and C1 minus C2. So from here to here, we have made an over-approximation because we're saying that this must be true for all t, right? So for all t. And because it must be true for all t, let's just reduce this equation that the coefficient must be zero, okay? All right, so for one pair of accesses with the data dependence, we get this constraint that C1, capital C1 minus capital C2, C1 minus C2 into U equals zero. Recall this is exactly what we had done when we were also solving for an example. Once we have this, then for the example that we have been looking at, this is what this would look like. Say U in our case was this three cross five matrix, the example that we had just seen. Maybe I got a couple of values wrong here, so maybe this was one. And now basically I have this equation that C1, one into this whole thing into this whole thing should be equal to zero. So, I mean, just studying what this gives us is going to give you C1, one. So just vector matrix multiplication is going to give me C1, one into one plus C1, two into zero minus C2, one into one and everything else is zero, equals zero. So that basically gives me C1, one equals C2, one. Similarly, if I look at the second column, I'm going to get C1, two equals two into C2, two. All right? And finally, I'm going to get C1 minus C2 plus C2, two minus C2, two equals zero. So these are exactly the equations that we had derived manually. And we just kind of doing this in a matrix vector form so that it becomes easily automatable. And so these are the equations that this equation kind of represents, all right? And so this is what we get. C1, one equals C2, one. C1 equals C2 and C1, two equals two into C2, two. All right, so based on all this, eventually we get an equation of the form AX equals zero where X is basically all the unknowns. A is from the U matrix and the unknowns contain values inside the coefficient matrix, capital Cij and the additive vectors, small cij and we have to solve for this solution. Now, once again, a simple solution, a trivial solution is X equals zero, but we are interested in the maximum rank solution. What is the maximum rank solution for X? It is the maximum rank solution would have the dimensionality of the null space of A. If you recall your matrix linear algebra. So basically we're interested in identifying the null space of A and whatever is the null space of A that's going to form, the vectors of that are going to form the coefficient, the rows of the coefficient matrix that we are interested in such that the space partitioning constraints are satisfied. So here is the remaining solution. You basically have AX equals zero, X represents a vector space, which is actually the null space of A and we can use Gaussian elimination to identify the minimum number of free unknowns in this vector space. Now, because we want to separately treat the coefficient matrixes and the additive unknowns, we first eliminate constant coefficient unknown small ci as they can take any value including zero because these are the remaining free variables in my small ci's. So I can just remove them after I have reduced it. So maybe I have some relationships saying C2 equals C1 plus one. So now C2 is dependent on C1 but now I can just set C1 to zero because things that are independent can be set to zero. And so based on this transformation, I'll get A prime X prime equals zero. So these are just mechanics of how to solve this equation or how to identify the basis vectors of the null space. And finally, I identify the basis vectors B of the vector space formed by X prime. B stands the null space of A prime and so these basis vectors basically give me the max rank solution. Once again, if I don't use the basis vectors or if I only use one of the basis vectors, then I get a smaller rank solution. If I use none of the basis vectors, I get a zero rank solution. That's everything is zero, right? If I use all of the basis vectors, that's the max rank solution. So I use for a max rank solution, I use all the basis vectors and those form my rows of the coefficient matrix. That is the maximum rank matrix that is going to satisfy my space partitioning constraints. Finally, the coefficients, the only remaining question is what are the values of the remaining coefficients, small c's and they can be derived from the original equation AX equals zero. So once I have solved for the max rank solution for the capital C's, I can plug them in into the original AX equals zero solution where I had eliminated the small c's and I can solve for the small c's. So this is our general method of solving for the space partitioning constraints where we have generalized what we had learned for a single example to a general system of constraints.
