Title: Compiler Design Module 140 : Synchronization Free Parallelism Example
Video ID: oGuHyykAzZ0
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

we have been talking about data dependencies and how to figure out whether two statements in a loop nest or across different loop nests, have a data dependency or not. One of the reasons we talk about data dependency is to find parallelism in the program. For example, if there is no data dependency in the loop body across different iterations of the same statement or across different statements in the loop body, then we can call that loop embarrassingly parallel, and we can parallelize that loop on the number of available processors. However, there are cases where even if there are data dependencies across different static accesses or statements, still there is a possibility of parallelization. To see that, I'm going to discuss an example in this module. So consider this loop nest for i equals 0, i is less than 1,000, i plus plus. For j equals 0, j is less than 1,000, j plus plus, aij equals ai plus 1, j minus 1. Now, if I ask you, is there a data dependency between aij, the static access aij and the static access ai plus 1, j minus 1? The answer is yes, because there exist many instances where both of them basically access the same memory location, and of course, one of them is the right, the aij memory access or the static access or statement involves a right, and the one on the right involves a read, and so there are all kinds of read after write, data dependencies in this particular loop nest. However, I claim that it is possible to parallelize this loop still, and the amount of parallelism that we have is almost on the order of 1,000. That means I can actually have 1,000 processors that are busy to process this loop and I can get similar orders or speed up by parallelizing this loop. One of the important things here is when I say that the loop is parallelizable, I'm really saying that it is parallelizable without having to do any synchronization between the different threads or processors that are going to execute in parallel, and that's why this is also called synchronization-free parallelism. There are different types of parallelism. There's synchronization-free parallelism, in which case each of the thread or each of the process or each of the processor logic is completely independent and does not need to synchronize with any other thread, and that's what I'm going to discuss in this module. Later on, you're also going to see examples of parallelism which involves synchronization and how a compiler can automatically transform programs into parallel programs with or without synchronization. In this case, the compiler is interested in parallelizing this particular program over a number of cores, and the question is how could a compiler do that? Once again, this loop is not embarrassingly parallel because there exist data dependencies between aij and ai plus one j minus one. To understand why there is the possibility of parallelism in this particular program, let's draw our iteration space, and in this iteration space, because it's a 2D loop, I can easily draw it on a slide, and it starts from 0, 0, i, j. j is on the y-axis and i is on the x-axis, and then this is 0, 1, 0, 2, 0, 3, 0, 4, and so on, and then this is 1, 0, 1, 1, 1, 2, 1, 3, and so on, and on the x-axis, it goes till i equals 999, just one less than 1000, and on the y-axis also, it goes till j equals 999, just one less than 1000. Now if I look at what are the dynamic instances that actually have a data dependence, I basically see that there are data dependencies between two dynamic instances of iterations i1, j1 and i2, j2, if and only if i1, j1 is the instance of the first axis aij and i2, j2 is an instance of the second axis ai plus one j minus one, and so i1, j1 and i2, j2 have a data dependency if i2 plus one equals i1, basically they need to access the same location. First of all, the constraint is that both i1 and j1 and i2 and j2, all four of these variables should lie between, should be greater than equal to zero and less than equal to 999. So that's the first constraint which basically comes from the constraint of the loop iteration space and mathematically is specified using the capital B and small b matrix and vector respectively. And then the third constraint is capital F1 i1 plus small f1 equals capital F2 i2 plus small f2 and that gives us this set of equations which says i2 plus one equals i1 and j2 minus one equals j1. So these are the conditions under which the two static axes would access the same location. And so notice that i1 is i2 plus one and j1 is j2 minus one. And if I was to draw this relationship, what are the pairs of i1, j1 and i2, j2 that have this relationship, it's going to look something like this. So for example, this point can be i1, j1 and this point can be i1, j1, this is i1, j1 and this is i2, j2. And notice that i2 equals i1 minus one or i1 equals i2 plus one and j1 equals j2 minus one. And so I draw an edge between the two points to indicate that there is a data dependency between these two points in the iteration space. Similarly, there is a data dependency between these two points. So this was i2, j2 is equal to 1, 0. So if I say i2, j2, it would be 0, 1, maybe I should say j2, i2 and this is j1, i1. So j2, i2 would be 1, 0 here and this was 0, 1. Here it would be 1, 1 and this one, this point here would be 2, 0 and so on. This would be 2, 1 and this would be 3, 0 and so on. So all these points basically in the iteration space have a data dependency and any two points between which there is a data dependency, I am drawing an edge. And notice that these are some edges that I would draw. If I was to complete this figure and draw edges between all pairs of points that satisfies this relationship, then this is what the diagram that I'm going to get. 0, 0 has no data dependency with anything else. 0, 1 has a data dependency with 1, 0. 0, 2 has a data dependency with 1, 1 and 1, 1 has a data dependency with 2, 0 and so on. And so these are my dependency chains. Notice that in my dependency chains, I'm not drawing arrows because these are just data dependencies. They're just saying that these two iterations, these two points in the iteration space have a conflict, have a dependency. In other words, they access the same location and so because they access the same location, I'm drawing an edge between them and it's not, I mean I'm not basically attributing an order. Actually, I could have drawn an edge by saying you know which one in the original program, which one was executed first and depending on that, I could have drawn an arrow from the one that occurs earlier to the one that occurs later. So for example, in this case, j is the innermost index and so because j is the innermost index, the iteration space is basically being traversed first along the vertical y-axis, then along the second y-axis. So basically the order of iteration is first this direction, then this, then this and then this and so the arrow if I was to draw from an earlier iteration to a later iteration would basically be pointing in these directions. But in my figure, I'm deliberately not drawing the arrows. It doesn't matter, you could have drawn the arrows, you may leave them alone but in any case, these represent my data dependencies across actual iteration indices and now as soon as I draw this picture in this particular example, this 2D picture in this simple example that we are taking, it is very clear that there are these linear chains of dependencies and it is a, and so these linear chains of dependencies need to be accessed, need to be executed sequentially you know based on the ordering based on the arrows that we have defined but across these chains, all these chains are completely independent of all the other chains. So for example, this particular chain here is independent of this particular chain or this particular chain and so on and so these chains can be executed in parallel with respect to each other. Each chain can be executed in parallel with respect to each other. How many chains there are? Well, if I look at, you know, so if I consider every even this point as a chain, so this is a chain of length one, this is a chain of length two, this is a chain of length three points and so on and then it will go all the way. So this is basically like if I were for the square, then the number of diagonals and so then each side of the square has thousand points. So what and it's a square, so if each side of a square has thousand points, how many diagonals will there be? Well, there will be almost 2000 minus one maybe, number of diagonals or minus or plus one maybe number of diagonals. Okay, so that's what it's going to be and each of these diagonals can be executed in parallel. So I can keep that many number of processors busy. Of course, these diagonals are not equal lengths, some diagonals are shorter and so those jobs will finish faster and the one some diagonals are really big like the one that basically is the longest diagonal that connects the two corners of the square, that's the longest one and that's going to take longer and so, you know, each of these chains are kind of different size but there are a total of, you know, order 2000 number of these chains and if I have let's say a thousand processors then it is possible to pack these 2000 independent jobs on thousand processors so that all the processors are kept equally busy. All right, so this is the idea that I'm going to have an outer parallel for loop. So I'm going to transform this program into an outer loop and an inner loop. The outer loop can be a loop that can be executed in parallel. So in other words, each iteration of that can be assumed to have been parallel. In other words, one iteration of that outer loop is data independent of another iteration of the outer loop, okay and so in other words, the outer loop is embarrassingly parallel and I can basically use threads to spawn threads for every iteration. This is also, for example, if you are familiar with the OpenMP model of programming, it basically means that the outer loop is parallel, parallelized using OpenMP pragmas or something like that and then there will be an inner loop which will have data dependencies and these would be basically the loop that's going to iterate over the length of every chain and because it has data dependencies it needs to be a sequential loop because I cannot execute the next iteration before I execute the first iteration and recall and although I've been drawing the arrows in this direction, actually the right way of drawing the arrows should have been in the other direction, okay because j was the innermost index in the original loop. Okay, so with that let me just fix the arrows in this slide as well. So that's what I'm going to do and in fact, this is one way of writing the program. The outer loop is basically a parallel for loop so I use the keyword par for k equals 0, k is less than equal to 1998 so that's a total of 1999 iterations, 1 less than 2000, k++ for l equals 0 so l also starts from 0 and then l is less than equal to minimum of k comma 1999 minus k right and l++ so this basically means that as k increases the length of the chain increases till a certain point till let's say 1000 in which case k becomes 1000 and 199 minus k becomes 999 and then it starts decreasing so the inner loop basically has a curve like this, l increases first till it reaches let's say 999 and then from 1000 on it basically starts decreasing. Okay, so that's what this is my new transform loop. How I arrived at this new transform loop I haven't really told you so far and this will be the subject of the discussion in our next few modules. So this is really a motivating module that basically discusses what is the significance or what is the end result we can expect from doing synchronization free parallelism transformations. I think it is pretty cool that a compiler can potentially transform a loop that we had earlier into a loop like this completely automatically and I claim that this particular program is equivalent to the program that I showed you in the previous slide. Notice that here basically I'm doing a k minus l comma l so which is for every chain basically I for every chain for every element of the chain the memory access that it does is a k minus l so I'm just basically redefining the indices from i comma j to k comma l and indeed what really I have done is i equals k minus l and j equals l or in other words that you know that's how I have kind of changed my axis and once I have changed my axis I get a k minus l comma l equals a k minus l comma l minus 1 and notice that here the element that was written in the previous iteration would be a k minus l comma l minus 1 and it's in the next iteration it would be red again and so what I have done is that you know I create I let's say I take this particular chain here so let's say I take this particular chain here I'm going to first write let's say a zero comma four then I'm sorry I'm going to start with j so I'm going to first write four comma zero right okay let's say I'm doing j comma i so then I'm going to first write four comma zero then I'm going to write three comma one using four comma zero then I'm going to write two comma two using three comma one then I'm going to write one comma three using two comma two and then finally I'm going to write zero comma four using one comma three and so what I have done is everything that was written just previous iteration is being read in the next iteration so what I have done is I have decreased the reused distance by doing this transformation of axes I have reduced the reused distance and this can also be seen in this code where basically in the previous iteration just in the iteration just before the current one in the ascending lexicographic order the value that I wrote was k minus l l minus 1 because just in the previous lexicographic order it was l minus 1 and in the new this iteration I'm reading that same value and so I have really reduced my reused distance across iteration although there were data dependencies I have reduced the distance between those data dependencies as well moreover I have basically been able to ensure that my outer loop is completely data parallel how do I know that my outer loop is completely data parallel well if I now look at what are the iteration you know what are the what is the set of memory locations that are accessed by this statement and basically say is there across different values of k I'm going to find that the two locations are going to be totally disjoint okay so that's basically the reason why I say that the outer loop is data parallel from from a pictorial point of view it is very clear all these chains are basically completely disjoint in other words they don't have anything in common they don't have a memory location that is in common and so what have I achieved with this transformation I have been able to once again I think these arrows are in the wrong direction so I'm just going to invert them but what I've been able to achieve is parallelism across multiple processors using the outer loop and so if I have multiple processors I've been able to parallelize this loop if this loop was iterating over a larger number of iterations then you know I may have had a significant speed up because of this parallelization almost the speed up which is ordered the number of processors moreover even if you didn't have more than one processor let's say you had a unique processor system even then this transformation has helped you significantly because what it has done is it has decreased the reuse distance between accesses that were being that had data dependencies so that this is something that I just discussed in my in my previous discussion the element that was written in the previous iteration is being read in the next iteration in the inner loop and so what I've done is I have much I have basically increased the locality of reference on a unique processor because I have decreased the reuse distance between the write and the read of the same memory location and so these are the kind of transformations that we basically want to do automatically using our polyhedral framework that we have developed so far and these transformations fall in the realm of synchronization free parallelism and we're going to discuss how this can be done automatically in our next few lecture modules.
