Title: Compiler Design Module 160 : Parallelization based on PDG
Video ID: SC8DqhbYAWc
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

So we've been discussing how we could add a small amount of synchronization. In fact, I could call it a constant amount of synchronization where the amount of synchronization is actually dependent on the program size and not dependent on the number of iterations in that program. So a constant amount of synchronization to basically extract more parallelism out of the program. And the idea is that we basically divide the program potentially using loop vision, such that we put barrier synchronization in the middle so that we are able to treat every kind of partition based on the barrier synchronization as a separate program and then parallelize it using our synchronization-free parallelization algorithm based on space partitioning constraints. So here is the high-level idea of the algorithm. Let's say I have some program. I first construct a program dependence graph or PDG. And recall that for PDG, every statement is a node and I draw an edge from statement S1 to S2 if there is some instance of S1 that is data-dependent on a later instance of S2. Data dependence is really easy to identify. We already know this. That's just the solution of equations fi plus small f equals f prime i prime plus small f prime and bi plus b is greater than or equal to zero and b prime i prime plus b prime is greater than or equal to zero. But there's an extra constraint which is later. So it should be the later instance that is data-dependent on some instance of S1, later instance of S2. And so this later clause basically causes more complication. And so what we do is we encode this later clause mathematically. And this was a precedence relation. And we lower the precedence relation into inequalities and potentially disjunction of inequalities and equalities. And then each of these disjunctions we basically solve using an integer linear programming solver. And if any of them results in a satisfiable answer, which means that there is a potential instance of S1 that is data-dependent on some later instance of S2. So that can only happen if these constraints that we have formed are satisfiable. And if they are satisfiable, then we draw an edge from S1 to S2. And similarly, we try S2 to S1. And similarly, we try S1 to S1 and S2 to S2. And this is for every pair of statements occurring in the program. So that's the PDG. And from the PDG, once I have drawn the edges, what I do is I basically identify what are the places where I can put a barrier. And what was the algorithm to basically decide whether I can put a barrier or not? I was saying that it should be a unidirectional dependence flow. In other words, it shouldn't be the case that there are edges going in both directions across that particular cross-section of the program. And another way to say that is that every strongly connected component, recall that in a directed graph, a strongly connected component is a subset of the graph where any node can reach any other node. So there are, for example, any cycle is a strongly connected component. So what I do is I identify the strongly connected component in the directed graph that is formed by the program dependence graph. And once I identify the strongly connected components, each of these strongly connected components can be thought of as one vertex in the graph. And then I basically do a topological sort on this strongly connected component to figure out which are the ones that must execute before the other, right? And that's basically exactly the logic we are using to decide where to put the barrier. So basically we would put a barrier from only if I'm sure that everything on the left of the barrier has to execute before anything on the right of the barrier executes. And that's basically what is going to be on the left and what is going to be on the right depends on the topological sort of this graph, of the program dependence graph. And so we transform the graph to execute each strongly connected component in topological sort order. So it is always correct. And firstly, there are many topological sorts for the same graph. So we can pick any of those topological sorts. It should not matter, it does not matter. And a topological sort is a correct schedule of execution because we are sure that things that are data independent, things that are data dependent are executed after the statements on which they were dependent, right? So basically the dependency graph is telling me the dependencies and the topological sort is saying that things that are dependent should be executed after things that they depend on. So transform the graph to execute each SAC in topological sort order. And notice that when I convert my program to PDG, I have basically abstracted out whether S1 and S2 belong to the same body or not. I'm just treating S1 and S2 as independent instructions, independent statements in the program. And so if there was an edge from S1 to S2 and I decide to first execute S1 and then execute S2, even though S1 and S2 were together in the original program, in the new program, they have to be in separate loopness. In other words, I have to apply loop fission. And it would be safe to apply loop fission if S1 and S2 do not form a strongly connected component. In other words, only, for example, S1 can reach S2, but S2 cannot reach S1. Then it is always safe to perform loop fission and execute all of S1 before any of S2. So we transform to execute each SAC in topological sort order. For example, execute all of S1s after executing all of, before executing any of S2. And we will apply loop fission if necessary, as I just discussed in the example of S1 and S2. And finally, I parallelize each SAC using synchronization-free parallelism. What I've done is I've divided the programs, divided the program into partitions such that, this partition should, if this partition executes first, then this partition executes second, and so on. And now within a partition, I cannot divide it any further, because that is my algorithm. I just basically divided the program into as many partitions as possible using the topological sort and strongly connected component inference. And once I have partitioned the program, I cannot partition it any further. And so for each partition, I just use a parallelization algorithm, which is basically our original space partitioning constraint based synchronization-free parallelism algorithm. So I parallelize each SAC using synchronization-free parallelism. For example, if it is S1, then I check whether iterations of S1 can be parallelized or not, et cetera. And finally, I add barriers. That was the whole idea of doing the topological sort. I can now add barriers between the different SCCs so that every SCC is basically completed before the next SCC in topological sort is started. Okay, so this is my algorithm to identify parallelism with synchronization. Notice that this algorithm makes use of the algorithm that we first discussed of to use synchronization-free parallelism. The idea is that we first partition the program and then for each partition, we use synchronization-free parallelism. But there are some weaknesses of this algorithm and I have not addressed them so far. In fact, I'm not going to address them in the next few lecture modules as well. I'm going to address these limitations at the very end after we have discussed all the different ways of parallelizing in a fine loop nest. And I'm going to combine them into a one single elegant algorithm such that you basically get the best possible answer for a given program. But for now, I'm just going to discuss the weaknesses of this algorithm based on the program dependence graph. So what is the weakness of this algorithm? The biggest weakness of this algorithm is that it may introduce unnecessary synchronization. In fact, even if the program didn't require any synchronization, I may unnecessarily add the synchronization if I just blindly use this algorithm. So this algorithm should be used not as a standalone but as a part of a bigger algorithm. I'm not discussing that bigger algorithm now, but it's good to know at least that this algorithm by itself is not going to give me the optimal answer. And here's an example. For i equals zero to n, i plus plus, let's say a i equals zero and b i equals one. Now it's very clear that this loop nest, different iterations of this loop are data independent. And in fact, I can just parallelize S1 and S2 completely on different processors. In fact, I have a two into n amount of parallelism. If I apply my space partitioning constraints for synchronization-free parallelism algorithm, then I'm going to actually get that optimal solution of two into n processors. However, if I apply my PDG algorithm, which requires constant amount of synchronization, what am I going to do? I'm going to construct a PDG between S1 and S2. So what is the PDG going to have? It's going to have nodes for S1 and S2. And now I'm going to draw edges whenever there are data dependencies. But notice that different iterations of S1 are data independent with respect to each other. Similarly, different iterations of S2 are data independent with respect to each other. Moreover, different iterations of S1 and S2, if I take the pair in either order, are data independent. And so the PDG that I get is just two nodes with no edges whatsoever, no dependency edges whatsoever. And so there are no edges between S1 and S2, or S2 to S1. And now if I just execute topological sort on this particular PDG, I could either execute all instances of S1 before all instances of S2, or vice versa, all right? And it doesn't really matter. But the algorithm itself is going to separate S1 and S2. It's going to separate them using loop vision. And so what I'm going to basically end up with is a graph which has loop vision, where all of S1 is executed before all of S2. So for i equals zero to ni++, ai equals zero, that becomes my first loop nest. Then I would have a barrier maybe. And then I would say for i equals zero to n, bi equals one. And this is just by design, by the, that is what the algorithm would produce. It's not the optimal solution, but this is what the algorithm would produce. And then finally, I will basically parallelize the first loop and then I will parallelize the second loop. So even though I have full parallelism within each of the loops, I have an unnecessary barrier in the middle. I could have actually just executed everything in parallel and there was no need for a barrier. And so there's unnecessary synchronization. So one way to write this is that this for loop is a parallel for loop, which means I spawn a thread for every different iteration of this for loop. Similarly, the second for loop is also a parallel for loop and then I put a barrier in the middle. But this is unnecessary synchronization and this is what I'm calling a weakness of the algorithm. And this is a simple example. In general, I have situations where I'm unnecessarily adding barriers where barriers may not be necessary. And that's the artifact of this algorithm. In fact, if I had, for example, just run the synchronization free algorithm first on this example, then I would have just got the best possible solution and then I wouldn't have to worry about running this particular algorithm. And that's basically going to be the structure of our higher level algorithm, which decides which algorithm to use, whether they use synchronization free algorithm or the PDG based algorithm for constant synchronization. And finally, there's one more big weakness of this algorithm. And that is that it requires the program to execute in lockstep. So the whole SCC executes, maybe parallelized and then there's a barrier. So wait for all the CPUs to come there. If one of the CPUs is slow, then it would cause the entire program to become slower because a barrier synchronization has to wait for even the slowest CPU to catch up. And the other problem is that there is no consideration for data locality. So anytime there's a barrier, then across the barrier, the parallelization schemes could be totally different. For example, if I am accessing an array AIJ, and this is an example that I've used earlier. So before the barrier, I may be parallelizing on I, and after the barrier, I may be parallelizing on J. But if I do that, then at the barrier, there will be a lot of synchronization because when I parallelize on I, then for a single value of... So one CPU's cache is warmed up with a single value of I. When I parallelize on J, then every single CPU needs to access different values of I, but for a single value of J. And so at the barrier point, then across the barrier, there will be a lot of communication. For a shared memory machine, that basically means there'll be a lot of cache coherence traffic. If it's a message passing machine, that basically means that you need to exchange a lot of messages. You have to basically send data from a CPU's before the barrier that held that data before the barrier to CPU's that held the data after the barrier. In most cases, this communication overhead across the barrier is justified because it's kind of okay, because you've always also gained because of parallelism in different partitions that were created by the barrier. But across the barrier, you have to pay an extra synchronization cost. In some situations, this may be more costly. The benefit of doing the parallelization may be less than the cost of synchronization, the cost of communication. In other cases, it may be the other way around and you would have gained something. Overall, also it depends on the machine. If the machine has, you know, if it's a distributed machine, for example, if it's a distributed shared memory and there are lots of different machines connected over a slow network, then this communication cost over the network would become large. And so the advantage of parallelism would become less. In any case, you know, these kinds of cost judgments can be done separately and that's an orthogonal topic. The topic that at least we have a mechanism to analyze if that is going to give you a better answer. And then finally, there could be a compiler module that basically checks whether the transformed program is actually faster than the original program or not, or which transformations are profitable and which transformations are not. And depending on that, apply only those transformations.
