Title: Compiler Design Module 139 : Solving Data Dependence Constraints
Video ID: VbLKIqSWs7M
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

Last time we were talking about how we can identify what are the statements in the program that have data dependencies. Recall that a data dependency involves two conditions. One is that one of them needs to be a right, and the other is that there needs to be some dynamic instance of the first statement and some dynamic instance of the second statement, which basically access the same memory location. And when I say statement, I'm really talking about the static memory access. So it's not one C statement, it's one C statement could have many different static accesses, and I'm just considering each static access as one statement in this discussion. So recall that for the second constraint, we basically get constraints of the following form, b i plus b is greater than equal to zero, where i is the iteration vector for the loop nest of the first statement. Similarly, b prime i prime plus b prime is greater than equal to zero, where i prime is the iteration vector for the loop nest of the second statement. And capital B and small b, capital B prime and small b prime basically dictate the loop bounds of these iteration variables. And finally, we have the constraint which says that there exists i comma i prime such that fi plus small f equals f prime i prime plus small f prime. In other words, there exists a dynamic instance of the first statement that conflicts with some dynamic instance of the second statement. i and i prime are arbitrary variables. Further, for some cases where we are interested in identifying whether there's a data dependency between two different dynamic instances of the same statement or static access, then we also have an extra constraint which is i should not be equal to i prime. So now, basically the problem of determining whether two statements have a data dependency or not has been reduced to the problem of finding whether there exists a solution to i comma i prime such that i and i prime satisfy these system of equations that we have. And so question now reduces to the problem of trying to solve these system of equations. And so that's the problem of solving the data dependence constraints. And the question is, does there exist a vector i and a vector i prime that satisfies the system of equations? And so what do we know about this problem? First of all, I want to point out that these system of equations consists of inequalities which are greater than equal to and less than equal to, greater than less than. These are called inequalities. Equalities which are fi plus f equals f prime i prime plus f prime. And notice that any equality can also be written as a conjunction of inequalities because if it's equal to, then I can say it's both less than equal to and greater than equal to. And the conjunction of these two basically imply that it's equal to because it's both less than equal to and greater than equal to so the only option remaining is equal to. So in other words, the first four components, the first three components or four components of this system of equations can be represented as a set of, as a conjunction of inequalities on the variables i comma i prime. And these are, notice that these are all linear in equations, linear inequalities because there's only a fine multiple or a fine inequality because there's only a constant multiple of i and i prime appearing in these equations. Even here in the second, in capital F equations, in equations, I can just bring i prime to the left and then I can start representing this in the similar form as bi plus b greater than equal to. So these are all of the similar kind of form. And finally, there is, for some kinds of data dependencies, those involving different dynamic instances of the same statement, we also need an extra constraint which is i is not equal to i prime. And this is important because for those cases, we don't want solutions that are just trivial solutions. And this kind of an equation or this kind of a constraint is called a disequality. So notice that I'm using the word inequality for the first type of equations that are greater than equal to or less than equal to and things like that. And then I'm using the word disequality for not equal to, all right? And disequality is a different nature of constraint than inequality because it puts, actually it makes a little bit more, things a little bit more complex as we're going to discuss next. So when we have a disequality, i is not equal to i prime, disequalities can be written as a disjunction. Notice that so far we were only talking about conjunction of inequalities, but for the first time because of a disequality, we'll have to deal with a disjunction of inequalities. And how can I represent a disequality as a disjunction of inequalities? Well, i is not equal to i prime is the same as saying either i is less than i prime or i is greater than i prime, but i is not equal. So notice that the equal to sign is missing in these inequalities. But the important thing to point out here is that it's an odd. So it's a disjunction and not a conjunction. Here it was an and, right? So when I say all these constraints should be satisfied, all these constraints should be satisfied, I'm basically saying the conjunction of the constraints are satisfied. Here I want to have a disjunction because of the odd and that causes a little bit more complexity in the system of equations. Okay, now let's figure out how one could potentially go about solving this problem. And the first thing to do, to kind of do when you're trying to solve a problem is to characterize the problem. And the characterization of this problem is that the problem is NP-complete. And you can call it a bad news because that basically means that trying to find solutions to just data dependency constraints may be very expensive because we don't really know yet any polynomial algorithm to solve such a system of equations. However, the good news or the better news is that efficient algorithms or heuristics exist for identifying a solution for the common cases. So there are many heuristics that can be used to basically check for the common cases and basically be able to decide whether there exists an I or an I prime or not. And for those cases, for some subset of these problems, we will be able to identify a yes or no answer. And for other subset of these problems, we will have to resolve to something which is more expensive, for example, an exponential time algorithm. Moreover, the other thing to notice here is that the vectors I and I prime are not that large. So even though the problem is NP-complete, even exponential time algorithms will not, I mean, may be tractable depending on the size of the number, the dimensions of the vectors and things like that. Okay, so the other interesting thing is that this problem can be represented or reduced to the problem of integer linear programming and what is integer linear programming, also called ILP, I'm going to discuss in my next slide, which is also NP-complete. Of course, if this problem can be reduced to ILP and this problem is NP-complete, then ILP must also be NP-complete because if ILP was not NP-complete, then this problem cannot be NP-complete because there's a reduction. Now I'm claiming that this problem can be reduced to ILP. And the good thing about ILP is that ILP is a very standard problem and many important problems, many important mathematical problems, discrete mathematical problems can be reduced to ILP and for this reason, there's a lot of research that has gone into trying to solve ILP in efficient manner using heuristics and things like that in a best effort way, as much as possible. And so these kinds of solutions that people have developed have been developed in the form of software artifacts and these are also called solvers. So these are called ILP solvers and so you need to construct an ILP, an integer linear program, and give it to the solver and the solver is going to return, it's going to apply all the possible heuristics that it knows it's going to do some kind of search algorithm, which is also going to be some kind of guided heuristic, machine learning based search, perhaps. And eventually, if nothing else works, then it's going to do a brute force search, which may be an exponential algorithm. But the good thing is that there's a lot of research, a lot of people, a lot of existing software that is available to solve these ILP problems and so if we can reduce this problem to ILP, even though the problem still remains NP complete, we don't have to kind of reinvent the wheel, we can just piggyback on all the effort that people have done in writing ILP solvers. So question is what is ILP? Okay, so ILP is basically a system of equations of the following form. Let's say the unknown is X, which is a vector. So there's a matrix A multiplied by X should be less than equal to B. So this is one form, this is one type of constraint and this basically represents, you know, you can have, depending on the number of rows in A and B, you have lots of different inequality constraints on X. For example, it could be four X plus three Y plus Z is less than equal to 10, all right, I'm just making it up and there could be several such constraints that are encoded by just a single equation in matrix vector form, which is AX is less than equal to B. Then the other constraint of ILP is that all the X values are non-negative. In other words, X is greater than equal to zero and the third constraint of the ILP is that the unknown X must be an integer and now this is an important constraint and that's why it's called integer linear programming as opposed to just linear programming. It's called linear because these are all affine constraints. So, you know, these are affine inequalities. Then it becomes integer linear programming because we say that the unknowns must be integers and it turns out that because of this constraint that the unknowns should be integers, the problem becomes NP-complete. If the unknowns were not constrained to be integers, the problem can be solved in polynomial time and that's called the problem of linear programming. But that's not what we're interested in because in our exam, in our setting, the variables i and i prime also need to be integers because they are the iteration indices of the loop and it doesn't make sense for the iteration index of a loop to be fractional. I should point out that often these ILP solvers rely on, you know, try to basically, one of the approaches to solving ILP problems is to first solve the LP problem, which is polynomial and then based on that kind of develop some guesses on what may be the integer linear programming solution to this, if any. Notice that when we give an ILP problem to an ILP solver, there are two types of solutions that it can produce. It can either say, yes, there exists a solution and here is an example of a solution, or it could say, no, there exists no solution and I'm 100% sure that there exists no solution to this system of equations. So that's what an ILP solver returns. So ILP solver takes as input the system of equations, notice it's a conjunction of inequalities and this constraint that X belongs to a vector of integers. So in other words, each of the elements of X is an integer and the output is either a yes or a no. A yes basically means yes, there exists a value of X which satisfies the system of equations and potentially it can also give you that value of X back, or it says no, I'm 100% sure that there cannot exist a solution to this system of equations. In other words, the system of equations is infeasible. Okay, so now that we understand what is ILP, let's figure out how to rewrite or how to reduce our system of equations, the data dependence constraints to ILP. And the first few constraints which are relating to the iteration space B, B, B prime and F I plus F equals F prime I plus F prime can simply be written as inequality. We've already discussed how inequality can be represented as a conjunction of inequalities and so what we really have is just a conjunction of four different inequalities here and that can always be represented as a single inequality matrix K X is less than equal to B and also you can choose X in such a way from I and I prime, so that X is greater than equal to zero. In fact, recall that when we started our discussion on quality to analysis, we assumed that I is basically incrementing by one and starting at zero or something like that and so already we can basically, just use X equals I, I prime, but in just in case your integration indices start from a negative number or end at a negative number or something like that, then you can always add an offset, a constant offset to it such that X is greater than equal to zero. And now this is in conjunction of equations that is in a form that can be taken as input by an ILP solver and then we can rely on the ILP solver to either tell us, yes, there exists a solution to X in which case there is a data dependency or it would say, no, there cannot exist a solution to X in which case we are sure that these two statements do not have any data dependency and because they do not have a data dependency, we may be able to, the compiler may be able to reorder those two statements with respect to each other. But right now, so far, I've only talked about these first three constraints. What about the fourth constraint, which is a disequality? How do we model that as a conjunction of inequalities? Now recall that a disequality is a disjunction, not a conjunction of inequalities and so it cannot directly be reduced to an ILP. The trick we can use here is that we can create two ILP problems and solve each of them independently. The first ILP problem can be I is greater than equal to I prime plus one and so just this constraint with all these constraints and then we basically construct an ILP out of it and say, does there exist a solution to this? If the answer is yes, we know that there exists a solution to this original set of constraints because there exists a solution to I is greater than equal to I prime plus one or in other words, I is greater, strictly greater than I prime plus one and everything else. So that also means I is not equal to I prime and so we know that there exists a data dependency and if the answer is no, then we use the other constraint along with all the other constraints as well. So basically this along with the other, the first three constraints and again give it to the ILP solver. So we make two ILP solver queries to solve one data dependence constraints problem. One with I is greater than equal to I prime plus one and the other with I is less than equal to I prime minus one. If any of these ILP problems returns yes, then there exists a data dependency. If both these problems return no, there does not exist a solution, then there exists no data dependency. So we have reduced this problem of solving data dependence constraints to two problems of integer linear programming. This slide just shows that. So basically this is the first problem which is AII prime is just using an example assuming that this is I and I prime are non-negative, then I can just say AII prime is less than equal to B, I is less than equal to I prime minus one. This forms one problem for ILP and this forms the other problem for ILP and if any of them return yes, the answer is yes. If both of them return no, then the answer is no.
