Title: Compiler Design Module 39 : More Type Rules
Video ID: EJHgY_1yyGs
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

So now I'm going to discuss more typing rules for our language. I'm not going to discuss all the typing rules, but I'm going to discuss some representative typing rules that will give you an idea of what goes on in these typing rules. So the first typing rule here is similar to something that we've discussed before, which is that if there's an identifier false, then it is always true that the identifier false is of type bool. Notice that there is no hypothesis that's required for this conclusion, and this is called the false one. Similarly, it is true that the identifier true is of type bool in our language. Similarly, if C is a character literal, for example, if it is a character literal A, for example, then it is true that C is of type cal or character, C-H-A-R. Finally, if B, if it is true that B is of type bool, then not of B is also of type bool, which basically represents a negation in our language. But when I look at the typing rules, then not B is of the same type as B if B was type bool. Notice that the typing rules also tell us what are correctly typed expressions and what are not correctly typed expressions. For example, we don't have a typing rule that says what is the type of not B if B was an int, and that basically means that in our language, not of B would be in type error if B was not of type bool. For example, if B was of type int, and I use not B, exclamation B, in my syntax, then that is not well-typed because the typing rules don't support it. However, if B was of type bool, then exclamation B is well-typed, and it's of type bool. Similarly, if it is true that some expression E1 is of type bool, and it is true that E2 is of type bool, then it is true that E1, logical, and E2 is also of type bool. So these are some typing rules that basically expand the scope of well-typed programs. We have already seen some of these before, and we're just expanding these to include more, to kind of admit more programs as well-typed. Here's another rule that's relating to a relational operator, for example, the less than operator. So it says that if X is of type int, and it is true that Y is of type int, then X less than Y is of type bool. Now notice that this assigns a type to this relational expression X less than Y. But for example, if X was of type int and Y was of type bool, then we don't have any type rule that basically assigns a type to X less than Y, and that would be qualified as a type error. So for example, which of these are well-typed? Is exclamation three well-typed? The answer is no. Is one greater than two well-typed? Well, one is of type int, two is of type int, and one greater than two becomes a relational operator, which kind of falls in the same category as less than, and so the answer is yes. Is true greater than false a well-typed expression? Well, the answer is no, because we don't have a rule that says how the relational operator should be type if both the left-hand side and the right-hand side are bools. We only have a rule for ints, but not bools, and so in this case, the answer is no. And similarly, in this case, the answer is no, because even if one of them is a bool, which means not an int, then we don't know how to type this relational expression. Okay, our language supports the sequence operator, which is a semicolon operator similar to C and C++, and here is a rule for the sequence operator. It says that if it is true that E1 is of type T1, and E2 is of type T2, then E1 semicolon E2, which means E1 sequenced with E2, is of type T2. So basically in our language, this evaluation of E1 semicolon E2 is going to represent an expression that evaluates to the value that E2 evaluates to. And so when you sequence these expressions in this way, the type of this expression is also the same type as the type of E2, which in this case is T2. Notice that it requires this expression is well-typed only if both E1 and E2 are well-typed. So for example, is this expression well-typed? Two plus three semicolon four plus five? Well, the answer is yes, because we know that two plus three is well-typed. We know that four is well-typed. Both of these have type end. We know that this expression is well-typed because this will have the type end based on the sequence rule. And then if this is end and this is five and I do a plus, then that is also well-typed. So this entire expression is well-typed. Now let's look at this expression. Is this expression well-typed? Well, this has type end based on our rules. This has type bool based on our rules. So this whole thing has type bool based on our rules. This has type end, but we don't have a rule which says what is the type of bool plus end, a term of type bool plus a term of type end. And so this is not well-typed. Similarly, we have a typing rule for scope. So if the programmer creates a new scope using these curly braces, then if the original expression, if it was true that the original expression E was of type T, then this new expression which creates a new scope and puts E inside that scope is also of the same type T. So for example, this expression here is well-typed because we know that this expression is of type end. And so because of that, this expression is of type end using the scope rule. And because of that, this expression is of type end because of the sequence rule. And so the answer here is yes, this is a well-typed expression. All right, now I'm going to come to one of the more complicated expressions, which is the assignment expression. So firstly, let's understand what the assignment expression says. So we allow in our language, an expression of the type X colon equals Y, which basically means that Y is assigned to variable X. Recall that an assignment expression evaluates to the value that has been assigned. So it basically means that if I say X colon equals Y and let's say Y had the value three, then this whole expression X colon equals Y will also have the value three. And it will have the extra effect that three will be assigned to the variable X. And so for example, if I say X colon equals four plus five, it has the effect that nine is written into X, but also this whole expression here evaluates to nine. For example, I could do X colon equals four plus five plus one, and I could expect the value 10 for this whole expression. And so the type of this expression is the type of the assigned RHS expression. So because I'm assigning a value to the assignment expression, I'm also assigning a type to the assignment expression and the type is the same as a type of the RHS expression, then this example would be in. So I'm going to show you the full typing rule in a few slides from now, but I just want to introduce what this assignment operation means and how one would go about typing it. So here is my first attempt to try and type the assignment expression. And let me say that it's an incorrect attempt. So the rule says, this incorrect rule says that if it is true that X is of type T zero, and if it is true that Y, another expression is of type T one, and if T one is a subtype of T zero, then X colon equals Y is well typed and this whole expression is of type T one because this whole expression evaluates to the value Y and so the expression also has a type and that type is T one. Why is this rule incorrect? Well, think about it. Is the following expression type correct? If I say one colon equals two, should it be type correct? Well, it appears that this rule allows, this type rule deems this to be type correct. For example, you can, in this case, one is of type int. So T zero would be int. Two is of type int. So T one would be int. T one is a subtype of T zero because int is a subtype of itself. And so one colon equals two is type correct based on this rule because it appears that one colon equals two is correct and it also evaluates to the value type or it also has type int. However, we know that this is not correct because we only want to assign two variables not to any arbitrary expressions. In this case, I want this to be some kind of a variable, for example, X or Y. I cannot have one or I cannot have X plus one on the LHS of an assignment operator. So I need to, if I want to catch such errors at compile time, I need to change my typing rules. I need to make my typing rules more strict. So let's try to understand how we would make the type rules more strict. We want to say that one colon equals two is incorrect but we want to say that X colon equals two is correct. So we want to have a way of distinguishing between the type of one and the type of X even though they may both have the type int but we want to have some difference between the two types. So one is of type int and so the difference is that X is also of type int but X is a type of type reference to int. And so we call the type of one an int value type and we call the type of X an int reference type and we represent an int reference type with an ampersand operator just after int. So for any type, so this is not just specific to the int type, we can have a reference type for the bool type or for any other type in our system, for example, the char type. But the important thing here is that we need to have a way to distinguish between the two types and the two types are the reference type and the value type for any underlying type. In this case, it's the int type. So we have the int reference type which is represented as int ampersand and the int value type which is represented as int. Reference type and value types. So for example, if I is an integer literal then it is true that I is of type int and when I say int, I mean the value type int. So for example, if one was an integer literal, one is an integer literal, then it is true that one is of type int. However, if the user declares a new variable and we're going to see how declarations work later on, but let's just say that X was declared as of type int, then in this code here, we want to be able to allow assignments to X. For example, we need to be able to allow X colon equals one and so what should be the type of X in this region, in this code region? Can it be just the value type int? Well, we already said that the value type cannot be on the LHS of assignment and so if we give it the value type, then X colon equals one will be disallowed. Can it be a reference type int? Yes, we want it to be a reference type int and so we will have ways to give types to variables and we'll give them reference types and we'll allow assignments to reference types but not to value types. So only reference types can appear on the LHS of an assignment statement, but value types cannot appear on the LHS of an assignment statement. So a term X of type, of reference type int ampersand can be safely used in any context where a term of type int was expected. So here's another interesting thing about reference types. A term of int ampersand can be used anywhere where a term of type int was expected. So for example, just like one plus two is a correct expression, X plus two is also a type correct expression because any place where a value type was expected, in this case, a term of value type was expected. So int value, one is of type int value. A term of type int reference can be used. So for example, you can always replace one with X and that would still be type correct. But the other way around is not true. It's not true that a term of type int can be always safely used in a context where a term of type int ampersand was expected. For example, X colon equals three is something that I want to allow as type correct, but I don't want to be able to replace X with one here and allow one colon equals three. So this is incorrect, but this is correct. In this case, both are correct. So there is this relationship between value type and reference type. A term of reference type can be used in any context where a term of value type was expected, but not vice versa. How do we say that? We already know how to say that. We say, if a term of type of reference type can be safely used in any context where a term of type value type was expected, then what do we know about it? We know that the reference type is always a subtype of value type, because it's exactly the definition of the subtyping relation that we discussed previously. And so for any type T, the corresponding reference type represented by T ampersand is a subtype of the corresponding value type represented by T. So a reference type is a subtype of the corresponding value type. So let's take an example subtyping relations. Say we have two types, T and U, such that U is a subtype of T. What will be all the subtyping relations? So it's not just true that U is a subtype of T. We recall that we also said that subtyping is reflexive. So U is a subtype of U, T is a subtype of T, but now we also have reference types, U ampersand and T ampersand, and how are those related to each other? Well, U is a subtype of U, T is a subtype of T. That just comes from reflexivity of the subtyping relation. U ampersand is a subtype of U, T ampersand is a subtype of T. That comes from the fact that reference types are always a subtype of the value types. And then U is a subtype of T, as said here. And if I was to draw the tree of the subtyping relation as a diagram, as a tree diagram, then U is a subtype of T, denoted by this arrow, and U ampersand is a subtype of U. It basically means that anywhere where a term of type T was expected, I can use a term of type U ampersand. And similarly, T ampersand is a subtype of T. Now you may ask the question, what about the relation between T ampersand and U ampersand? Well, the relation between T ampersand and U ampersand depends on whether you want to allow an assignment to a U variable from a T value. So for example, depending on the programming language designer, they may decide that indeed U ampersand is a subtype of T ampersand. And if they do that, they're basically allowing an assignment to a U variable from a T value. And this is typically not done, for example, in languages like C++. So once again, when a programming language designer is choosing the subtype relation carefully to kind of balance the trade-off between what kind of errors, what kind of programming syntax they want to allow as type correct, which in turn is guided by what kind of errors is the programming language designer willing to allow at runtime and wants to catch at compile time. All right, so with that, we come to our final typing rule for the assignment operator. The typing rule looks like this. If it is true that an expression E0 is of reference type T0 ampersand, and E1 is of some type T1, which may be a reference type or a value type, and T1 is a subtype of T0. Notice that I'm saying T1 is a subtype of value type T0, even though E0 is actually a reference type. Then E0 colon equal to E1 is well-typed, and this whole expression has type val of T1. So what does val of T1 mean? Val T1 returns a value type corresponding to T1, which means if T1 was a reference type, then it removes the ampersand. So if T1 was int ampersand, then it just, val of T1 gives int. And if T1 was originally a value type, for example, if T1 was int, then it just returns T1 itself. So val T1 returns the value type corresponding to T1 if T1 was a reference type, and returns T1 if T1 is a value type. So for example, val of int is just int, and val of int ampersand is also int. Now notice that the conclusion assigns a value type to the assignment expression. So this is a value type and not a reference type, which means that I cannot use this and kind of assign another value to it. So for example, this following expression would be incorrect. So X colon equal to Y, this thing has a value type and not a reference type. And so it cannot appear at the left-hand side of an assignment operator. And so this is not type correct based on our typing rule. Now I'll leave this as an exercise. You can change this typing rule so it starts accepting this expression above. And I'll let you figure that out. And if you do that, you also want to figure out whether doing that, what would be the execution semantics of that? Your typing rules will also dictate what the corresponding execution semantics are. So for example, what should the value of Z be assigned to? Should it be assigned to X or should it be assigned to Y? And depending on that, you would probably want to choose how you change the conclusion of your typing rule. However, notice that our current typing rule accepts the following expression. It accepts X colon equals Y colon equals Z because Y colon equals Z of value type, which can be again assigned to another reference type using the assignment. Now I want to point out that we kind of use this subtyping relation as a hypothesis in our assignment or as a precondition in our assignment rule. What if we didn't use it and what if we kind of restricted that E1 should be of the same, so E0 should still be a reference type of some type T and, but E1 should be the value type T corresponding to E0's reference type. In which case this is a valid well-typed expression and has type T. Now clearly this rule is shorter and simpler than the rule that I had earlier. But what is the problem? First of all, it requires the RHS to be of the same type as LHS. And so this is sound, which means that this is a rule that will only accept correct programs, but it is imprecise because it rejects some programs that we want to admit in our language. So for example, you can see that this rule, this rule is stricter than this rule. For example, we can substitute T0 with T and T1 with T and all the requirements hypothesis that this rule requires are satisfied by the hypothesis that the original rule required. And the conclusion is also kind of similar. If we kind of restrict T0 and T1 to be the same type T. But the original rule is actually more general because it admits more programs than the new rule. For example, for object oriented inheritance, let's say I have a class A which represents type A and I have another type B which derives from type A. And so my subtyping relation looks like B is a subtype of A or B is a derived type of A. Now in my assignment rule that I had earlier, I allow this kind of operation, which is a variable of reference type capital A is assigned a value of derived type or subtype capital B. And so this is allowed by our original assignment rule, but will be disallowed by the assignment imprecise rule. Even though the assignment imprecise rule is sound, it rejects more programs. It does not admit as many programs as we wanted it to or as original rule did. And it is for that reason we call it imprecise. We call it sound because it still only accepts the correct programs. It doesn't accept any incorrect program, but it doesn't accept all the correct programs. And that's why we call it imprecise.
