Title: Compiler Design Module 175 : Introduction to Static Analysis Approaches
Video ID: W44YMeBIVKw
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

Now we're going to switch gears and actually talk about static analysis or approaches to basically identify whether a piece of software that you have written is correct or not, or more precisely, whether it satisfies certain properties or not. So I'm actually going to start with a discussion on software engineering. And there are, you know, software is one of the most complex types of machines, if I may call it, that is being developed, you know, by us, by humans over the entire span of the kind of engineering that humans have done. And so software tend to be one of the most complex kind of machines that we develop. And so it's no surprise, therefore, that software also tends to be one of the most buggy or most kind of, you know, non-correct kind of machines that we develop because there are so many kind of small, small things that you can get wrong when you're developing software. So software engineering is thus a very important part of any computer science curriculum, or in general, a computer science person's set of skills. And so, you know, one approach, and there are several kind of different ideas that have come up on how to do good software engineering. But one of the big ideas is basically called, you know, basically kind of allows you to grade your software development process on different kind of scales. And based on the process of the software development, you basically say how good is the software? What is the quality of the software? So, you know, these are called key process areas or KPAs. I'm just going to use these acronyms very quickly just to understand, you know, what kind of things do people talk about when they talk about software quality. And then there is this kind of grading mechanism from going from level one to level five. That's called the capability maturity model. For example, if you don't have any key process areas, then, you know, your level one, which is the lowest level, also called initial. If you do project map planning, configuration management, QA, which is quality assurance processes like testing, et cetera, then, you know, you are at the second level, which is called repeatable. If you further do peer reviews, intergroup coordination, and training, then your software is likely to be in the third level of the CMM ladder. It's called the defined model. If you further do quality management, for example, by, you know, by employing the correct kind of processes such as continuous integration and deployment and stuff like that, then you will be called the managed model. And if you actually do change management in that, so if, you know, any change happens, then what should basically happen in the process of software development, and you're doing this in a very systematic way, then you will be the highest level, level five. But as you can see, I mean, this is all about the process. And even if you get the perfect process in place, after all these processes are being run by humans, humans make mistakes, and so as an end result, the software can still have bugs. So if I was to kind of draw an informal graph between, you know, the process being followed or the rigor in the process or the cost that I kind of spend in each of these different functions of this process, and on the y-axis, I call it the software quality, you would basically get something like this curve, which basically, initially the process improvements basically seem to improve the quality significantly, but very soon the improvement in software quality doesn't show up. And, you know, you can put more money into it, you can put more checklists into your process, but the software quality doesn't significantly go up. And these are all the different types of different software development processes, like Agile or RUP and things like that. And, you know, the state of the practice currently is that this is what you do, but if you have critical systems, first of all, you know, what is the perfect software? And I think that is just unattainable. I mean, you want a piece of software, for example, a large piece of software, like an operating system or a server or a compiler, which is completely bug-free and which has, you know, a huge amount of complexity. I think, and that is basically, you know, being changed on a continuous basis. I don't think that's even possible. So I'm just going to say that's a perfection goal and that's probably not even possible. But then there are kind of critical system acceptability goals. So if your software is going into a critical system, like, for example, if it's going to run a nuclear power plant or if it is going to run on the flight controller system for an airplane or, you know, a set of airplanes or if it's going to go into your self-driving car or if it is going to go into some kind of space mission, right? So these are all super critical applications. And, you know, you really want a very high assurance in the quality of the software. And all these process-level constraints on the software development process fall short of meeting that level of quality. And that's the problem that we are going to try to address or at least, I mean, we're going to at least look at techniques that people are using today to kind of address this gap between what is desired, which is, let's say, critical systems acceptability and what is available, which is process-level techniques to basically ensure software quality. So, you know, I'm going to use this diagram to basically show, to basically kind of compare and contrast the different approaches to ensuring software quality. And these are going to be mechanical, automatic, computer-based approaches as opposed to kind of putting constraints on human processes, et cetera. So let's say, you know, this basically is the forbidden zone. These are the kind of states that should never be accessed. For example, the nuclear button should never be pressed or the program should never segment, it should not cause a memory error. It should never be able to write beyond what it's supposed to write, et cetera, things like that. And so, you know, all these red lines demarcate the forbidden zone. So everything above this red line is the forbidden zone, everything below this red line is forbidden zone. And also, you know, there may be regions which are forbidden, which I mean, I'm just drawing a graphical picture so I can draw any kind of this circle. And these red circles also represent forbidden zone. And this gray line here represents an execution of the program. And, you know, in this execution, I'm showing that, oh, the execution is going through different states of the computer or of the machine, but it is never kind of touching any forbidden zone. For example, it's not pressing the nuclear button or anything like that. And so this is a fine execution. And so this is what, you know, in this picture, if I was to basically compare and contrast all the different approaches that we use to ensuring software quality, the first approach that we, so the first thing here is, what is our goal? We want to basically ensure that the software that we have written basically stays away from the forbidden zone. It never kind of does anything bad. And we can define what the forbidden zone looks like. I'm using some examples like pressing the nuclear button, et cetera. But as I said, you know, it could also be, it should never set fault or something like that. And whatever property you define, you want to check that all possible trajectories of the program, irrespective of what trajectory it takes, it should never touch these red circles or across these red lines. And that's our goal, right? And that's basically what we want to do. And one of the popular and most kind of common approaches to ensuring this goal or to kind of at least going towards this goal is testing, where we basically, you know, try a lot of different trajectories by giving a lot of testing inputs. We also use fuzzing of inputs to basically generate random inputs and things like that. And sometimes we basically implement unit tests. Sometimes we do integration tests, et cetera. And based on that, we basically try to have a lot of coverage of the space. And this is also known as test coverage. There are different ways to basically measure test coverage. For example, people measure test coverage as the number of source lines of code that are executed. Or some people measure test coverage as the number of paths that are executed in the program. But none of these coverage metrics are actually going to guarantee that there does not exist a path that was not tried by this testing methodology that I'm showing with this dotted line that does not actually cross the red line and into the forbidden zone. And so, you know, all your testing may just may look fine. And you may say, okay, you know, all my software passes all my tests, but there was this one kind of trajectory that you forgot to check. And, you know, that trajectory actually causes the forbidden behavior. And if a remote hiker can exploit that vulnerability, then he or she can basically cause damage to your organization. So let's say these are all the tried things and these are all the not tried things. And some of them, some of the not tried things can potentially enter the forbidden zone. And this is a very common reason why, you know, we have security exploit or why we have failures even for critical systems and things like that. So while testing is a great idea and testing must be done and testing improves software quality in a big way, yet testing does not solve all our problems. In particular, it does not solve our problem for critical system acceptability criterion. Because, you know, I can test everything, but if I send a rover to Mars and at Mars it fails, I have spent billions of dollars sending the rover to Mars. And because of the silly software bug, you know, all those billions of dollars are lost. Or basically, you know, if somebody, you know, if there's a loss of life because of this, I mean, that's simply not acceptable. One approach here is called bounded model checking. And the idea is that, you know, maybe the kind of different behaviors are for, you know, this is basically representing the behaviors for different values of inputs. And the larger values of inputs are basically shown on the right and the smaller values of inputs are shown on the left. And so bounded model checking basically tries to exhaust all possible values of inputs up to a certain bound, right? So, and so, you know, so basically in this, I'm showing solid lines up till a certain point. And after that, I'm showing dotted lines. So I've explored all these behaviors till a certain values of the, till certain small values of the inputs. And for them, you know, the program was behaving nicely, but there's no guarantee that for larger values of inputs, I don't actually crash into the forbidden zone. And so even this bounded model checking is a good idea because it actually, you know, at least there's some guarantee that, you know, all the small values are being checked and all the program behavior for small values of certain parameters that you want to check. Maybe it may be inputs or it may be something else. Whatever are the small values, for them, the program is safe, but, you know, that doesn't give you the guarantee of large values. And why to kind of stop at small values? Because the total space of all the possible program behaviors is so large that it's not possible to completely exhaust all the possible behaviors of a program, right? Because a program is typically, you know, think of an operating system or a compiler. The space of inputs that it can take is so large that it's just not possible to exhaust it. But what you could potentially do is say, okay, let me try, you know, if it was a compiler, let me try all programs which are less than five lines of code. That is potentially possible, but, you know, but that's bounded model checking, but that gives you some level of confidence. It's, you know, it is an orthogonal approach to testing. I won't say that bounded model checking should be used as a replacement for testing, because after a bounded model checking focuses on a certain space and exhausts it, whereas testing kind of randomly checks all the space. So, you know, it's a supplement to testing, but it cannot be replacement of testing. And even then, it does not meet our bar of critical system acceptability. So here's an example of bounded model checking. Let's say, you know, very trivial and crude examples. So for I equals zero to N, I plus plus. And if you were doing bounded model checking, you say, okay, let's check for the first 10,000 values of N. And if it doesn't work there, you know, then basically exhaustively check for all the first 10,000 values. But what's the guarantee? That the 10,001th value was the problematic one. And so you don't know where to stop. The next approach is called abstract interpretation. And we're going to spend some amount of time discussing abstract interpretation in this course. And so the idea here is that you basically identify an abstraction of all possible trajectories. And I'm also calling it over-approximate. So let's say that all the possible trajectories are shown here in these different colors, like green, yellow, orange, and purple. And then I've been able to identify some envelope of all the possible trajectories that the program can take. And that envelope is basically represented using these gray lines and shaded with these kind of striped light gray shades. And so this is an abstraction. And basically, the first thing I need to prove is that this abstraction over-approximates, which means covers all the possible trajectories that this program can take. So basically, the program may be taking a lot of kind of complex trajectories, but I've been able to kind of abstract and say, okay, you know, all the trajectories that it takes will belong to this envelope. And so there will be no trajectory that's outside this envelope, and that's important. So that's number one, and you could define an abstraction. I'm calling it an abstraction to basically indicate the fact that it's a cover of all possible trajectories. And once I've defined an abstraction, and if I'm able to prove that that particular abstraction, notice that in this abstraction, I'm also basically drawing these circles around these forbidden zones saying, oh, these abstractions exclude these forbidden zones. Somehow I've been able to design such an abstraction. So it also shows that designing such an abstraction may be a little bit hard, but if I'm able to design such an abstraction, and I'm able to show that for this abstraction, I can prove, mathematically prove that it cannot enter the forbidden zone, then I have actually made progress, and I say, okay, because abstraction cannot touch the forbidden zone. That means none of the trajectories can touch the forbidden zone, and so I'm sure that this program will never enter the forbidden zone. So let's take an example of an abstraction just to make the discussion more concrete. So let's say I had a program just for i equals zero, i is greater than equals zero, and i is less than n, and then i plus equals f. So I'm basically representing a program where i is being incremented by some unknown value that's being returned by this function f. And then every time it can increment by an arbitrary amount, just that I'm sure that it should lie between zero and n, and it can actually go up and down and oscillate between the two values, between different values. It doesn't even need to be monotonic, et cetera. And now it becomes pretty difficult to reason about this program, because maybe the behavior of the program depends on the sequence, maybe it depends on the exact values that are taken, et cetera. But if I am able to abstract it, I can just say, okay, I don't care about the order. I don't care about what is the exact increment. Let's just say that, okay, I know that i will be always greater than zero, and i will be always less than n, and maybe it takes all the values one by one in an increasing order, or maybe it takes all the values in a completely decreasing order. I've lost some information here. For example, I've lost the information that i started at zero, or that it increments by the value that f returns, et cetera. So I'm losing information there. That's why it's a cover. It's kind of increasing the number of behaviors. Some of the behaviors in this cover were never possible in the original program, but yet we are kind of, that's why it's called over-approximate. And so we have expanded the cover. And now if this cover, because this cover has simpler properties, it's just about saying that, oh, I can take any value between zero and n, and repeatedly so. If under this cover, I'm able to prove a property, then I have proven a property for the original program as well. For example, if under the abstraction, I'm able to prove that it never enters the forbidden zone, then I have proven that the original program also never enters the forbidden zone. And this approach is also called abstract interpretation because we interpret the abstraction instead of the original concrete values. This has become clear when we discuss more examples why it's called abstract interpretation. Now, of course, finding the abstraction is the key. For example, this is not a useful abstraction because in this abstraction, some parts of the abstraction are actually going into the forbidden zone. And so I'm not able to complete the proof using this particular abstraction. So identifying an abstraction that completes the proof of the program not entering the forbidden zone is the key here. And question is, of course, how do you find such an abstraction? All right, so we're going to keep discussing this point about how to find an abstraction as we go along. But the good thing is that if we are able to complete an abstract interpretation proof, AI stands for abstract interpretation. So if I am able to successfully complete a proof using the abstract interpretation effort, which means I'm able to find an abstraction, which basically I'm able to prove that it never enters the forbidden zone, then that forbidden zone will never be entered by the original program also. That's a guarantee by the construction, as I've been saying. And this property is also called soundness. That if the abstract interpretation method basically produces a proof that this program will never enter the forbidden zone, then you are sure that the original program will also never enter the forbidden zone. And that's property is called soundness. On the other hand, it is not necessary. I mean, this whole business of finding an abstraction is a pretty hard thing. It's undecidable in general. And so it's not necessary that, so if your algorithm basically tries to find an abstraction and it is unable to find an abstraction such that I'm able to complete the proof that the program doesn't enter the forbidden zone, that does not mean that the program definitely enters the forbidden zone. It just means that your algorithm was not good enough to find such an abstraction. Maybe it's still possible that the program was safe and it will never enter the forbidden zone. On the other hand, it's also possible that the program was unsafe and there were some things that were actually going to enter the forbidden zone. In both cases, we are basically not going to be able to find a provable abstraction. And so this method is not complete, which means the failure to find a proof does not mean that the program is not correct. But on the other hand, if you find the proof, then you're sure that the program is correct. But on the other hand, you're not guaranteed that you'll always be able to find a proof. And that's a limitation of the abstract interpretation method. So the abstract interpretation method is not complete, but it is sound, okay? All right. There's also another category of tools which are called bug finding tools. And where the idea is, if these individual lines represent tests, then these bug finding tools basically amplify or expand the coverage of each of the tests and basically try to kind of fuzz or kind of see different, or exhaust the neighborhood of those tests, et cetera, to basically increase the probability of finding a bug if one exists, right? So most of these approaches, including bounded model checking, testing, and bug finding is basically about increasing the probability of finding a bug if one exists. And so if you keep trying this and you've done it for, let's say, few months on a machine or something like that, and you didn't find a bug, you say, okay, there's a very small probability that there's a bug, but there's still a significant amount of probability. And for a mission critical system, that may not be acceptable. So these approaches, bug finding tools, they just extend the testing process and these are neither sound nor complete. They're not sound because they don't even, they don't even generate any proof that I'm sure that this is just, it's the best effort thing. You just try different points and say, okay, you're just trying to improve the probability, but you're not getting any guarantee. And it's not even complete because they're not generating a proof. How do you even talk about soundness or completeness? So once again, soundness basically says that if the tool finds a proof of no violations, then there exists no possible violations. An abstract interpretation is a sound strategy. So if the abstract interpretation says there's a proof of no violations, there exists no possible violations. On the other hand, bounded model checking is not a sound strategy because it may say that there exists no violations for n less than 10,000. And so that's a proof. You can generate a proof that for n less than 10,000, there are no violations. How does it generate a proof? It can try all the values to 10,000 and say, okay, look, I mean, these are all the possible values and there were no violations. So I can generate a proof that for n less than 10,000, it's not going to generate any violations. But that does not mean that there exists no violations because maybe for 10,001, there is a violation. But abstract interpretation, on the other hand, is a sound technique. On the other hand, completeness says that whenever there exists no possible violations, the tool will always be able to find a proof of no violations. Abstract interpretation is not a complete strategy. So to summarize, abstract interpretation on AI is sound, but not complete. On the other hand, other approaches like testing, bounded model checking and bug finding tools are neither sound nor complete.
