Title: Compiler Design Module 13 : Derivation Tree and Order
Video ID: sOs_POC9tvc
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

We're going to study more about CFGs today. So recall that for a context-free grammar, there is a corresponding meaning to it, which is the context-free language that it represents. And given a string, we are interested in knowing whether that string belongs to that language or not. So that's a membership query. And a parser is supposed to tell us whether a string belongs to a context-free language or not. But that's not all. If it does, then it should also produce a parse tree, which represents the meaning of that particular sentence or statement or expression, depending on what is the context. And if no, then there should be some error handling mechanism, right? So if that string is not a valid legal sentence in that particular context-free language, because the context-free grammar cannot produce that particular sentence or string or sequence of tokens, then either we can just say that, OK, it does not belong, which would be just saying parse error and returning to the user. Or a better error handling would be to basically tell the user that, OK, this is where the problem occurred and this is where I failed. And even better response would be to tell the user that this is where it failed and then try to recover from there and continue and parse the rest of the program so that multiple errors can be reported to the user or the developer in one go. There exist automated tools to do this. For example, there is the well-known Bison parser available. So this particular tool basically, or any parsing tool like Bison, requires an input context-free grammar that the user is going to program into the system. For example, the context-free grammar that we saw for the C programming language in the previous module. And this tool is going to emit a parser implementation. Parser implementation is a program that can take as input a string and return either a parse tree, if that string belongs to the language represented by the context-free grammar or produce the appropriate error handling logic. All right, so once again, the automated tools exist, which basically take as input a context-free grammar, which includes terminals, non-terminals, productions, start symbol, and emit an implementation of a parser that will basically check whether any input string belongs to this particular language or not. Okay, now we're going to study how these tools potentially do that. What are some algorithms that can help us produce, figure out whether a string belongs to the language or not, or more accurately, tools that will generate a parse tree from a sequence of tokens. But before we do that, let's understand a little bit more about CFGs, context-free grammars. First of all, many grammars generate the same language. So here is an example. Let's say there's a production which says E can produce E plus E. This is some example that you've already seen. Now there's another way to write this particular production. I could split this into two productions, introduce a new non-terminal F, and say E produces EF, and F produces plus E. Now you can see that the two are pretty much equivalent. I'm just splitting the job of producing the right-hand side in the first case to two steps in the second case. And so both these grammars are likely to, are going to be equivalent in the languages that they represent. And so, in other words, so this is an example which shows that you could represent your grammar in any way which you like. They could be significantly different grammars that actually represent the same context-free language. Also, this has an implication because parsing tools are sometimes sensitive to the form of grammar. So it is not usually possible to parse every grammar. So although in the previous slide I showed you that you could input any grammar, but tools will typically restrict what is the type of grammar that you may input. So the grammar should have certain properties in the way it has been written. And if it has those properties, then the parsing tool will be able to generate a parser implementation for that grammar. Otherwise it will not be able to generate a parser implementation. So what are these properties and why do they matter? We're going to understand once we understand what are these algorithms that are used to parse such strings. Okay, now also we talked about derivations. So we said that a string or a sequence of tokens is accepted by a context-free grammar if there exists a derivation starting from the start symbol to that string. Okay, so such a derivation we represented as a sequence of steps. But there's another way to represent derivations and that's called the derivation tree. A derivation tree is not very different from a parse tree that we have already understood. But it also kind of, you know, you can also say what is the derivation or what was the production that you used to generate that part of the tree. So for example, in this case, I am showing you three deductions, one from ID to E. ID to E, there are three different identifiers, each of them getting replaced by E. Using the production, E produces ID. I'm just taking a shortcut here. There should have been three different steps and I'm just putting them all in a single step. Then we could have a production which apply the production E goes to E star E and that would reduce the first ID star ID to E because E star E to E. And then we could apply the production E goes to E plus E to reduce the plus operator with the two expressions on its left hand side and right hand side. Now, the interesting thing to note in this example is that there is an ambiguity. I could have either reduced E star E to E first or I could have reduced E plus E to E first. So while this is one derivation tree, so one derivation tree, I will show you another derivation tree on the next slide. So here is another possibility of a derivation tree and see that it looks completely different from the derivation tree which had earlier. In this particular derivation tree, I'm first clubbing ID plus ID into a single capital E and then at the top level, I'm clubbing E star E to produce E, the star symbol. Now, this is another possibility and this is a completely different possibility from the first derivation tree. In fact, these are two different derivation trees and which one should we use is unclear in this particular example and so this is an ambiguity. Programming languages can have ambiguities, but ideally, there should be a way to resolve such ambiguities and we're gonna see some more examples. For example, in the case of arithmetic expressions, we would probably have some rules like the board mass rule which says that the multiplication should be given higher priority than addition and in which case, maybe the ID star ID should have been grouped first before grouping it with the plus operator. Notice that these two derivation trees represent two different parse trees and thus they represent two different expressions altogether. In the first case, I would multiply first and then add. In the second case, I would first add and then multiply. And so this ambiguity is not just at the syntax level but also at the semantics level. What does this expression mean? Okay, moreover, there is the issue of derivation order. So I could have the same derivation tree but I could derive it in different orders, all right? So this is different from ambiguous derivation trees because there could be two different trees but even if I just consider one tree, I could either derive it left, I could either do a leftmost derivation which means at each step, I'm going to expand the leftmost non-terminal or I could do a rightmost derivation which means that each step, I'm going to expand the rightmost non-terminal or I could do anything else. For example, I could choose to expand the middle non-terminal and then maybe this left one and then the right one or any which order. Recall that when we discussed context free grammars, we said that we could pick any non-terminal in the current alpha i non-deterministically. And now we're going to kind of study that a little bit further and say, and actually there are two interesting derivation orders. One is leftmost order and the rightmost. The main derivation order but the two interesting orders from the perspective of parsing implementations. So the leftmost derivation, so let's assume that this particular string that we're interested in is id into id plus id. And also let's assume that we are going to, the top level operator here is plus and then this is going to get clubbed, right? And then this is going to get added. So to do this, you know, both leftmost and rightmost are going to expand e plus e and the first step, all right? But let's see. In the leftmost, I'm going to first expand the leftmost e. So in this case, it's going to become e star e plus e. Then we're going to say e. So the leftmost again is e. So I'm going to produce that and produce id here. Star e plus e. Now the leftmost is this e. So I'm going to say id into id plus e. And now there's only one e remaining and so one non-terminal remaining. And so I'm going to say id into id plus id. And at this point, we have finished our derivation. So this is an example of a leftmost derivation. Similarly, I could have done a rightmost derivation. So in the rightmost derivation, I'm going to expand the rightmost non-terminal at every step. So this becomes e plus id, right? So we want to accept id into id plus id. So what's on the right of plus? It's id, so it becomes e plus id. Now the rightmost non-terminal is e. So it's going to be e star e plus id. Then e star id plus id. And then finally id star id plus id, all right? Recall that I'm using id for the identifier token, which could internally be any variable name, x, y, or z. And they can all be different names and things like that. Okay, so notice that they both produce identical derivation trees or parse trees, but they just differ in the order in which they were derived. In one case, we are deriving leftmost. We're doing a leftmost derivation. And in the second case, we are doing a rightmost derivation. Once again, they produce the same derivation tree. And so this is different from ambiguity in derivation trees. To summarize, a parse tree, what is a parse tree or a derivation tree? It has terminals at the leaf nodes and non-terminals at the internal nodes. So if you recall, all the derivation trees basically have non-terminals at the internal nodes and the leaf nodes have terminals. This is expected because non-terminals are further expanded while terminals are not. Further, we saw that there could be ambiguity. And the parse tree actually accurately represents or precisely represents the association. In one, for example, for id star id plus id, we would associate multiplication first and then addition. Whereas for the other derivation tree, we would first associate addition and then associate multiplication. And in some case, in grammars, there may be an ambiguity which one to use. There should be, we're going to discuss ambiguity in more detail in our next module. Further, even if there is no-no ambiguity, or even if there is ambiguity and there is a single parse tree, for a given parse tree, there could be multiple ways or orders to derive the same parse tree. And this depends on the method to derive it could be, for example, leftmost or rightmost or anything else. We just saw some examples for that.
