Title: Compiler Design Module 172 : Undef Value Operational Semantics
Video ID: _cqmCTWqCJg
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

Now that we have been introduced to the undefined value or undeaf, just like we defined the operational semantics of the Poisson value, we need to define the operational semantics of the undeaf value. So what happens if you multiply by undeaf or if you branch by undeaf or if you're defined by undeaf, et cetera. So first of all, an undeaf value represents a set of values. So example, if I just have a statement which says x equals i8 undeaf, this is LLVM syntax. So i8 undeaf basically means that it's an undeaf value of type i8. What this really means is that each time x is read, any value in the range of the type i8, which is 0 to 255, can be returned. Or if you want to consider i8 as a sine integer, then you can say minus 128 to plus 127. But the point is that each time x is accessed or x is observed, any value, any random value from this range can be returned. And that's what undeaf means. And this is very different from Poisson because in Poisson, if each time something is observed, it just returns Poisson. But here it's basically saying it's a non-deterministic value which can return any value from a given set. And by default, if it's an undeaf value, for example, the undeaf keyword in LLVM, that basically represents the whole set of values of that particular type. Even if, for example, I had something which actually generated undeaf because of some operation like maybe integer overflow or some other operation. Integer overflow in C is actually generating undefined behavior and that's really modeled as Poisson value. But let's say there was some other operation which was about reading an uninitialized variable. So if it's reading an uninitialized variable, whatever is the type of that particular variable, all the values in that set that that type represents, undeaf would represent a random value drawn from that type. And that value, that random value could be different each time that variable is observed. So that's another property of undeaf that we had discussed last time that each time an undeaf value is observed, it can return a different random value. And that's again for allowing better optimization. Now let's take another example instruction. Let's say we already established what are the values that x can draw from. It's the entire range of i8, let's say 0 to 255. And then let's say I do multiplication of x with 2. So x is y equals x into 2. Now, because x could have taken any value, what can y take? y can take only the even values in the range. So 0, 2, 4, 6, dot dot dot 254. What happens if x was greater than 254 divided by 2? So let's say x was 128 or 129 or something like that. Then 129 into 2 is just going to wrap around and become 129 into 2 would be 258 minus, let's say 256 that would just become 2. And so y is also a non-deterministic value, but we don't call it an undeaf value. We call it a partially undeaf value. Because an undeaf value represents the entire range of values that can be represented in a particular type. But y is not the entire range. y is selected values in that range. In particular, in this example, the selected values are all the even values and that's just coming from the computation. x could be representing any value and if you multiply that by 2, you can only get even values for y. And so each time y is read, it can return any value belonging to this set. So once again, y is going to follow the same principle as x, which is that each time y is observed, a different value may be returned from this particular set. Although the set has shrunk a little bit, it has become half of what it was originally. It's only the even values now, ignore the odd values. But each time y is observed, it could return a different random or non-deterministic value from this particular set. And so that's what are the semantics of the undeaf value or the partially undeaf value. And so in this case, x is a fully undeaf value and y is a partially undeaf value. Now, similarly, I mean, if I just say z equals x into 0, so now x could draw from anywhere between 0 and 255, but if I multiply it by 0, I only get 0. And so z is a deterministic value 0. And the other way to look at it is that z draws from a partially undeaf value whose set is a singleton set, which is 0. So if the set of a partially undeaf value is a singleton set, then each time that value is observed, you can only get a single value. So it becomes deterministic, right? So that's another way to look at it. I mean, you can either say that it's a deterministic value or you can say it's a partially undeaf value with a singleton set. Both are valid ways to look at it and they are both equivalent semantically. All right, so now the question is what happens if you branch on an undeaf value? And when I say branch on undeaf, I'm also including partially undeaf values as well. So for example, the undeaf value could be set of all even numbers or any subset. So for example, I could construct some arithmetic operation that constrains any variable to be some specific set of values from a given type. So for example, I could construct a set of operations that could constrain a particular variable to be, let's say, four values, one, three, seven, and nine. Just randomly chosen here. And whatever it is, as long as that value is basically a partially undeaf or a fully undeaf value which is not a singleton set. All right, so that's where we're going to make a distinction. If it is a singleton set, then everything is okay. But if it is not a singleton set which means it's a non-deterministic value, either partially undeaf or fully undeaf, then what should happen? And here the easy option is that branch on undeaf should be undefined behavior because it's very hard to reason about what should happen. One option is that you could potentially take any one of the branches non-deterministically but that interferes with the kind of transformations that a compiler would typically like to perform. For example, things like dead-core elimination and things like that. And so the easiest option is branch on undeaf causes undefined behavior. And this is the same kind of semantics that we had also used for the Poisson value. Recall that when we were looking at the operational semantics of the Poisson value, we said that a branch on a Poisson value is also undefined behavior. Another way to say that is that it's unreachable. So if this thing happens, then this is an unreachable code which means the program is basically, this should never happen. And if this happens, then the compiler can assume, I mean, the compiler can assume that this can never happen. And so for the case when this actually happens, the compiler can do anything it likes and doesn't matter. So that's what undefined behavior means anyway. And we are already familiar with those semantics. So what are the consequences of this easy option that branch on undef causes UB? We've already seen in the context of Poisson that because of this, you know, it becomes harder to hoist branches. One of the examples that we have looked at is, let's say we have if A and then a nested if and say if B. Now, can I change this to if A and B? So this is logical and this double ampersand operator is logical and. So I can first compute the logical and of A and B and then, you know, just execute the body that's here represented by triple dot here. But this is, is this okay? Firstly, if B was Poisson, then this is not okay. But if B is undef, then it is okay. I mean, B is either undef or partially undef, then this is okay because what will happen is, see, in the case of Poisson, what will happen is that if A was false, then this whole thing would have never executed. But in this case, if A was false, then for, but A and Poisson would still return Poisson and then branch on Poisson would give me UB. But now in the case of undef, if A was false, then false and undef would give me a singleton set, which is false. And so then if false will not be UB, it would just be that you don't enter the loop. And so that would be a perfectly well-defined behavior and that would match the behavior of the original source program because if A was false, then this kind of block has never entered in both sides of this transformation. And so this is okay if B is possibly undef, but not Poisson. So if the compiler can somehow reason that B cannot be Poisson, then this transformation is okay because for undef values, this transformation is all right. I also want to point out that the order doesn't matter. I mean, whether I do A and B or B and A doesn't really matter. Both are going to, if A was false, then both are going to return false irrespective of whether B is partially undef or fully undef or deterministic. And so this is, this becomes an okay transformation and this is a big kind of change from what was the operational semantics of Poisson. Let's look at another example. Let's say, let's look at this example of loop un-switching where there is an if-then-else within a while loop, let's say, and the compiler is basically considering this option of bringing the if loop outside, the if condition outside, assuming that the B was basically loop invariant. It's potentially possible to bring if B outside and then have two copies of the while loop and this way you have saved, you know, you kind of shrunk the body of the while loop. And is this an okay transformation? Especially in, I'm interested in the case when B could have been undef. And the answer here is no. This is not okay because let's say A was false, then in the original program the while loop is never entered and everything is okay. But in the new program, if B was undef and A was false, this is the case, if B is undef and A is false, then if B would immediately cause UB, and that's the consequence of an easy option that branch undef causes UB. So when we take these options, when we take these kind of choices on what to do when you branch on a non-realistic value like undef or poison, et cetera, we pay a price. I mean, firstly, we enable some transformations like things like dead code elimination, et cetera, but we also disable some transformation, things like hoisting of branches, especially loop unswitching is an example where you need to hoist a branch and that becomes an illegal transformation in this case. Of course, this is an illegal transformation also in the case when B was poisoned. But I would find, even if we are able to reason that B is not poisoned, but this is still an illegal transformation for B is undef or partially undef. Then there are some other kind of operations that we should talk about when we talk about operational semantics of non-deterministic value. So what happens when you do star x equals undef where undef could be a partially undef value as well. I mean, it's not very different from storing any other value, just store, set the memory bytes pointed to by x to the undef value. That's what the runtime operational semantics do. I mean, it's not very different. It doesn't cause any undefined behavior or anything like that. On the other hand, if you do star u equals x where u could be either fully undef or partially undef, then that triggers uv because now the program doesn't know which address to write at. If u is a partially undef or a fully undef value, if it's partially undef, then it's a non-singleton. So whenever I say something is partially undef, it basically means it's a non-singleton. It should have at least greater, at least two or more possibilities. So if u is a partially undef or a fully undef value, then this triggers uv because now the program, the abstract machine doesn't know where to write because there are multiple options and so this triggers uv. And this also has a consequence. Anytime you say something triggers uv, that basically means hoisting transformations are now disabled for these kinds of operations. Just like hoisting was now was disabled for branches, hoisting would be disabled for stores where the address of the store could potentially be an undef value. And we had seen something similar when we were discussing about the poison value as well because the star of poison equals x is also going to trigger uv. Similarly, just like store, a load from an undef pointer also triggers uv just because we don't know what the address is. The address becomes non-deterministic. Once again, I'm using, you know, when I say u, I'm talking about both partially undef and fully undef values with the set being a non-singleton. And this also triggers uv for the same reason. And once again, this means that I cannot hoist loads above, you know, outside loops or if conditions or if conditions or branches until I'm sure that this is not undef, the address is not undef and it is neither poison as we have seen earlier. Similarly, if I do x by u, then what happens? Now, this is interesting because u is a partially undef, could be a partially undef or a fully undef value. If the compiler knows, sorry, it's not about the compiler. So I'm talking about operational semantics. So when you say x by u, if I know that u is a partially undef value, if zero belongs to the set of values that you can take. So let me call that uval, then this triggers uv just like, you know, anything divided by zero triggers uv. Divide by zero basically triggers uv because machines typically, you know, through an exception on such operations. But if let's say u was not, this uval did not contain the value zero. So let's say uval contained only numbers that were one and above in a type of i8 or something like that, then x by u is not uv. And that's an interesting change from the Poisson value. So if u basically represented a set, a non-relative value drawn from a set which is, which does not contain zero, then x by u basically, you know, whatever is the value of x and the value of u, you basically combine them to find, form the values. So if I say y equals x by u, then let's say u was, let's say, you know, the set of uval was, let's say 1 comma 2 and let's say x was 4. Then y's values would be 4 divided by 1, which is 4 and 4 divided by 2, which is 2. And so this would be the new y values, right? So basically, you know, if it's not, if zero does not belong to the set of possible values that you can be drawn from, then we just basically, you know, enumerate all the possibilities and can create a new set for the return value. And then return value would also be a fully undef or a partially undef value, depending on the size of the set that we generate based on this operation. Finally, I want to also talk about another operand that is kind of specific to the LLVM IR, but it's something that we also seen in C and that's called the ternary operator. So something like condition question mark x colon y. So basically, this represents a value. This is an expression that represents a value, which is, you know, depending on the value of C, the values are going to be equal to either x or y. So if C was true, then it will be x. If C was false, then it will be y. And so that operation is basically encoded in LLVM. This ternary operator is encoded in LLVM using the select opcode. C is the condition, just like I had here. X is the true case value and the third operand is the false case value. And in this case, I'm interested in select with undef value. So what if one of the values of these, the second or the third operand is undef? Well, that's easy. If C was true, then it returns C. If C was false, then it returns undef. Now notice that this is a change from the branching thing. I mean, select is basically kind of a higher level representation of branch because unlike a branch where, you know, you could execute arbitrary code in the then branch and the else branch, for example, you could do memory operations, you could do more branches, you could do function calls. A select basically restricts its second and third operands to be expressions of a certain type or, you know, in case of three address code variables or registers of a certain type, whatever is the type of the return value. Okay. So to summarize, if undef is one of the two values, either the true value or the false value that is returned depending on the value of C, then this is not going to trigger any UV. It's just going to either return X in terms of the runtime operational semantics depending on the value if C was true and return undef if C was false. And, you know, I can do the other way around also if undef was the second operand, then, you know, it will return undef if C was true and X if C was false. Because I'm introducing the select operator for the first time, I should also talk what happens when select with poison value and once again, it's the same thing. I mean, if poison is one of the two kind of options depending on this value of C, then it just behaves identically. You know, if C was true, then it returns poison. If C was false, then it returns X. Also, I want to point out that one of the kind of transformations that a compiler would potentially do once it has figured out that this value is going to be always undef, for example, it can kind of convert select C X undef to X because undef can take any value. I mean, in this case, I'm assuming that undef is not a partially undef value but a fully undef value and so which basically means the non-deterministic value and recall that I can always transform from a more non-determinism to less non-determinism. And so if undef is a fully non-deterministic value, I can always choose a particular value which is the same value as whatever the X operand is. And so even though I don't know what X is, whatever it is, I can just take that value and then this becomes select of C, X, X and that can be just simplified to X because both depend irrespective of whether C is true or false return X and that can be simplified to X. And similarly, for the second statement as well, it's okay to transform this to a plain variable X. So this is a transformation you can do if the compiler can statically reason that this particular value, one of the two branches, branch values is basically definitely either an undef or a Poisson. Okay, what happens when undef is the C value? So if during the runtime, the value of C is undef and X and Y are the true values and the false values, if C was undef, then basically we choose non-deterministically between X and Y. So basically we return a partially undef value which has two elements X and Y and this is perfectly okay, right? Because undef can be, after all, C being a Boolean values, the first operator of a select operator needs to be a Boolean value. So undef can either be true or false. And so if it is true, then X, if it's false, then Y and so what you return, what you get in return is basically a partially undef value whose set is basically X, Y. And so these undef values are kind of keeping the non-determinism, not increasing the non-determinism unlike Poisson or something like that where they just kind of bring everything to Poisson. Here you're kind of keeping track of the exact degree of non-determinism as you go along in your execution. On the other hand, if I do select of Poisson, X, Y, then that immediately triggers UB because, I mean, it's basically like saying that, you know, you're basically doing some operation on Poisson and recall that if you do any operation on Poisson, you get Poisson back. In this case, you are deterministically doing some operation on Poisson. Notice that when Poisson was, you know, one of the true or false values, we actually did something which was less non-deterministic. So, I mean, depending on whether C was true, we could choose a non-Poisson value as well, so in that case, we are not basically following the rule that anything that is operated with Poisson basically becomes Poisson because, you know, we treat select specially or LLVM treats select specially and says, oh, we return Poisson only if C was true, if C was appointed to the corresponding branch where Poisson lives, otherwise we return the other value. But if Poisson was one of, there was a condition itself, then it triggers, then it's basically, I shouldn't say it triggers UB actually, it should basically return Poisson. Okay. So, this is a mistake. It returns Poisson. Okay. Now, contrast this with branching, right? So, this just returns Poisson. Contrast this with branching. In branching, if I said if undef dot dot dot or if Poisson dot dot dot, they both trigger UB. On the other hand, select being a higher level operator and kind of giving less flexibility, it cannot kind of execute arbitrary code in the if branch or the then branch. It's just a particular value which may or may not be Poisson. We can actually return Poisson or partially undef value. Whereas, when I have if undef or if Poisson, we actually trigger UB. So, there's a nice contrast between different semantics for the ternary select operator versus the branching operator like if.
