Title: Compiler Design Module 82 : Liveness DFA
Video ID: z7ZVVWRAKu4
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

Last time, we were talking about the liveness data flow analysis, and we discussed the two values. One was true, which means that a value may be live, and another was false, which was basically, it's definitely not live. Here, the true value is the conservative value, and the false value is actually containing some information. 

Now, today in this module, we're going to discuss the DFA rules that can be used to compute these values. Just like we discussed for constant propagation, we're going to have two types of rules. One is which is going to relate the out of a predecessor to the in of a successor, and the other which is going to relate the out of a statement to the in of the statement. Now, recall that unlike constant propagation, which was a forward data flow analysis, liveness is a backward data flow analysis. Information is moving from the exit upwards. On the other hand, for constant propagation, the information is moving from entry downwards. Forward data flow analysis is a data flow analysis where the data flow happens in the direction of program execution. Backward data flow analysis is a data flow analysis which has data flow in the direction which is against the direction of program execution. Liveness analysis is actually a backward data flow analysis. So here, we are going to be basically representing the value at the out of a predecessor as a function of the values at the in of the successors. This is just a flip of what we were doing in constant propagation. In constant propagation, we're representing the in of a successor as a function of the out of the predecessors. Here, we're doing the opposite. We are representing the out of a predecessor as a function of the in of potentially multiple successors. Also, I'm going to call this function L. Just like we had a function C for constant propagation, that for the values of that analysis, L is meant to represent the values of the liveness analysis. So L at program point P, at statement P for variable x, and whether I'm looking at the in of P or out of P. So in this case, I'm looking at the out of P, the program point which is just after the statement P. Then there are these statements S1 dot dot SN, and I'm looking at the liveness at Si, x, n. So what should be the rule? This time, we have the notion of orderings. So we're going to recall that when we're talking about constant propagation, we first had four different rules, but then when we talked about orderings, then we could just collapse those four different rules into a single rule which used the greatest lower bound idea. So that's going to happen in liveness as well. So this time, we're not going to enumerate all the separate cases, and we're going to use the idea of greatest lower bound. We already know what are the values, true and false. What is the greatest lower bound function? It is the logical or function. So here is the first rule. L of Px out is the logical or of L Si x in, where Si is a successor of P. So you look at all the values at the in of each successor, and you take a logical or of them, because notice that the values can only be either true or false, and that's the value that you would have at L Px out. So what's the idea? The idea is that if x is live at any of my successors, then it is live at my out point. So that's the idea, and it makes intuitive sense. If it is live on any of the paths, then it is live at the current location, and that's exactly what is being captured in this first rule. 

Let's look at the second rule. So that one rule actually captures all possible cases between predecessors out and successors in. So now the remaining rules are going to relate the statements in to the statements out, just like we did for quantum propagation. But again, because this is a backward data flow analysis, the value at in of a statement will be specified as a function of the value at out of that statement. And so here's the rule. If S is some instruction which involves computation on X. So for example, it's assigning to something, and then it is doing some computation on X. For example, it could be y equals x plus z or something like that, which basically means it is using x. It is using the value, current value of x. In that case, I would basically say that Lsx in is true, irrespective of what is Lsx out, because this statement is going to use the value of x, then the value at the in of the statement is always going to be true because that value is meaningful. It can affect the execution of the program. So the answer is true. And recall that true is the conservative value. So I can never go wrong if I just use the value true. 

The other rule here is that if S is an assignment to X, for example, if X is colon equal to E, and E does not refer to X. So this is the typo. It should be E does not refer to X. So if S is a statement, X colon equals E, assignment to X, and E does not refer to X. So it's not like X equals X plus one. In that case, we would use rule number two, right? Because something is occurring on the right-hand side, which is using X. So we will use rule number two, and we'll say that it is live at the input. But if X is not appearing on the right-hand side of the assignment, but it is appearing on the left-hand side of the assignment, LHS of the assignment, that basically means that X is getting overwritten. And if X is getting overwritten, it basically means that X is not live at the in of this particular statement. And so we're just going to say that LSXN equals false, right? So notice in here, in is basically the, just at the beginning of the statement S, right? So we have two rules. One easy way to remember it is, if the statement is using X, then it is live just before the statement. If the statement is defining X, then it is dead just before the statement, all right? So the distinction is between whether X is being used and whether X is being defined. If a statement is both using and defining X, in that case, we are going to use rule number two, and that means that it's going to be considered live at the beginning of the statement. 

And here's rule number four. If S does not refer to X, so if S does not, you know, neither defines nor uses X, then we can just transfer the value of SX out to SXN. So whatever is SX out also becomes LSXN. So notice once again that the analysis is actually backward because we are specifying the in value as a function of the out values, right? And so that's why it's backward. On the other hand, when we're talking about constant propagation, we were specifying the out value as a function of the in values. That's why it was a forward data flow analysis. And this is a backward data flow analysis, all right? 

So here's the Leibniz DFA algorithm. This is a familiar algorithm, we're just going to, you know, initialize LSXN out is equal false for all statements S and X. So why do I initialize it to false? Recall that when we were doing constant propagation, we were initializing it to top. Here we are initializing it to false. So what do you see common here? Well, if you look at our ordering, we are basically looking at the greatest element, which is greater than equal to every other element in my set of values. That is the element that I'm using to initialize. And that's actually common in both this algorithm and the constant propagation algorithm. Why is that important? Well, that is important from a precision point of view. And we haven't really discussed the precision argument yet, but we are going to do that later in the course. But basically, if you don't assign it the top value, if you assign it the top value, you're going to get a more precise answer than if you try to assign something in the middle or maybe you try to assign bottom. For example, just to take an extreme case, if I, for example, assigned LSXN out to true in the beginning, then my final fixed point solution is just going to be true everywhere because it's only going to go lower and so it's probably going to be true. Although, if it was just before, there will be some cases where it will become false, but it will be a more conservative solution. So it's not true that it's going to arrive at a fixed point, which is all true. It's going because of uses in some places or because of definitions in some places it's going to become false, but still the solution that I'm going to get will be more conservative than if I assign everything to false in the beginning. So intuitively, it makes sense to be as aggressive as possible in the beginning because anyway, the fixed point solution that you're going to arrive at is going to satisfy all our data flow equations, the system of equations. And so why not start from the most aggressive answer and then maybe settle at some fixed point that is an acceptable answer. If you start too low, then you're going to end up low as well. So start high and then keep getting low, lower till you reach a fixed point. That's basically the intuition. We are going to formalize this intuition later on. And then the algorithm is simple. It's similar. Repeat until all points satisfy the rules. In this case, there are only four rules. Pick a point where one of rules one to four does not hold and update using the appropriate rule. So this is exactly similar to how it was for constant propagation analysis. Just that here the rules are in the diverse direction and constant propagation, the rules were in the forward direction.
