Title: Compiler Design Module 124 9: Abstract Objects for Pointer Analysis
Video ID: y5ryr1EgXcg
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

So, we've been talking about points to analysis where we basically identify all the objects to which a pointer may point to and this is an object may point to other objects and so on and so forth and the question however is that in a program the number of objects that are actually created may be dynamically created may be unbounded, here's an example of a program with an unbounded number of objects and this is a simple program that creates a linked list, a node in the linked list is represented by struct lnode which contains a value v and a next pointer and this is a code in a C++ like language that just creates k different nodes and links them together in a linked list. Now, in general at runtime the program may have an arbitrary amount of logic that is preceding any allocation event, for example here the allocation event is this new lnode but the number of times this new lnode is called depends on the for loop and the number of times a for loop iteration executes depends on this parameter k, in general it is an undecided problem to identify how many times a loop may execute because the condition for the loop to execute may be arbitrary and so in general it is impossible to identify or undecidable to identify the total number of objects that a program may create at runtime. So the points to graph the actual points to graph for this this kind of a program would look something like this where the head is the list head because we assign the newly allocated node to n and we do n.next equals head so head points to the most recently allocated object whose next pointer points to the second most recently allocated object and so on until the last least the the oldest object which is whose next point is going to point to null and this is the actual points to graph notice that the number of objects in this points to graph is unbounded because an unknown at compile time what we need for our compile time analysis is that we need a predictable number of objects or a bounded number of objects that we can reason about at compile time this is this picture can be drawn at runtime but such a we do at compile time we don't know how how big this picture is or what the shape of this picture is going to be so to tackle this problem we define the notion of an abstract object an abstract object represents a set of runtime objects so for example the entire all the objects that are created for a given linkage may be represented by a single abstract object and so on and so it represents a set of runtime objects and this set of runtime objects may be that a single abstract object represents may be may be of bounded size or and size that is known at compile time or it may be of an unbounded size or a size that is not known at compile time for a compile time analysis to work we require that the set of abstract objects must be finite which means that all you know depending on how we categorized the runtime object so the idea is that for all the runtime object at the program we create we we partition those objects into different abstract objects so for example all the objects that were created for the linked list can be one single abstract object all the objects that were created for the tree binary search stream may be one abstract object and so on and any abstract the total set of such abstract objects must be finite so whatever scheme you use to partition these runtime objects into abstract objects must ensure that the set of abstract objects must be finite and a corollary of that is that a single abstract object may represent an unbounded number of runtime objects because after all the total number of runtime objects is unbounded and if we are trying to represent them through a finite number of abstract objects that means each abstract object may potentially represent an unbounded number of runtime objects so here's an example of abstract objects and in general you can choose any partition of the runtime objects as long as you satisfy the finiteness property of the set of abstract objects and and so you can be creative about how you partition the runtime objects into abstract objects now one and I'm going to give you three different ideas on how you may partition and these are just some ideas that that that that could be possible and you know some of these ideas are actually you are popular now because they are they are practically usable and useful in real programs but let us say that just because you know when we are discussing the link list example we were talking about how some object is the least freak least is the last allocated object second last allocated object or most recently allocated object second most recently allocated object and so on and that's how we are reasoning about the points to relationship in a linked list the only problem was we don't know how many such objects may be allocated so maybe we we partition these objects that are created in a linked list based on the time of creation and we say that an abstract object AI represents the last KI runtime objects created before all the objects that were represented by a 1 a 2 a 3 dot dot AI minus 1 to make this more clear let's say this was the timeline of program execution then if I am at this you know if I'm considering a program at at this point in the program execution then the last K1 of allocations maybe for the linked list are represented by abstract object A1 the K2 allocations that were prior to these K1 allocations are represented by abstract object A2 and so on and maybe the KN allocations that were prior to all these K1 plus K2 plus KN minus dot dot dot KS minus 1 allocations are represented by allocation or abstract object allocation N and notice that K1 K2 K3 KN are all finite numbers but but this the total number of allocations may be unbounded so we may say that all objects that were allocated before all these objects K1 K2 K3 summation of K1 plus K2 plus K3 plus dot dot dot KN all the objects that were allocated before them let's call them represent have them have a single abstract object called A last so in this scheme all these abstract objects A1 A2 A3 represent a finite number of concrete runtime objects but A last represents a potentially unbounded set of concrete runtime objects and so this is what this is this is the mathematical meaning of each abstract object for I belonging to 1 dot dot N AI represents the last KI runtime objects created before summation of KJ from J equals 1 to I minus 1 for example if I look at A2 then A2 represents the K2 objects allocated before K1 objects the last K1 objects or if I look at KN then it represents the if I look at AN then it represents the KN objects that were allocated before all the K1 plus K2 plus dot dot dot KN minus 1 objects allocated and so on and then there's an abstract object A last that represents all the objects created before all these objects were allocated in summation of J equals 1 to N KJ creations but this is just some arbitrary idea of grouping together concrete objects runtime objects into a finite set of abstract objects where each abstract object may represent a potentially unbounded number of concrete objects or runtime objects now let's look at how this recency abstraction how well this recency abstraction performs so this is this this this this this way of dividing or partitioning the concrete objects into abstract objects I'm also going to call it the recency abstraction where we abstract out the project the the runtime objects using the recency of their allocation and so let's take this linked list example that we saw which was the creation of a linked list using this for loop in this case we can say that the head pointer and let's say in our recency abstraction we use these parameters where N is equal to 2 which means I'm going to track two different classes of recent objects and K1 equals K2 equals 1 which means I'm going to say that you know what I'm going to keep track of the most recently allocated object the second most recently allocated object and all the objects allocated before the last two objects and that that will be the A last and if I draw the points to graph for this program notice that because I have now a finite set of abstract objects that is known at compile time I can I can draw this graph completely also I can I mean if I had some kind of analysis the best answer that I could get for this program is that head points to at you know at the end of this program head would point to the most recently allocated object which which I'm representing by A1 even an object of type A1 or an object in class A1 in abstract class A1 can may point to an object in class A2 so this is what this represents an object in class A2 may point to an object in class A last and an object in class A last may point to an object in class A last right so this is this is the at the picture the points to graph or the points to relationships between abstract objects for this particular program using the recency abstraction head may point to the most recently object allocated object the most recently allocated object may point to the second most recently allocated object through the next pointer the second most recently allocated object may point to an object in that belongs to the A last partition or class and and A last through its next pointer may point to another object within A last notice that we have you know when we do the subtraction we have lost some information for example here we are is you know this picture seems to say that it's possible for an object in A last class to point to itself whereas in the original program that was not possible you know an object cannot point to itself it can only point to another object but in this picture because we have abstracted out the concrete object into abstract object it seems like an object in A last may point to another object in A last which includes itself so so using this although abstraction helps us make the problem tractable it also introduces imprecision and and that can be seen in this example okay further while the recency abstraction worked well for a if the only program that was running or in the only function in the program was create list but let's say there was an other program called create tree that was going to create some nodes in a tree in some order and there was some parameter depending on which it will either create a tree of zero nodes one nodes two nodes etc and the main function let's say there was there were calls to these functions for example head equals create list and root equals create tree now because create tree may create any number of allocations and we cannot at compile time predict how many allocations create tree may make at the end of this program at this point at the end of this program the it's not clear where the head is pointing to the most recent allocation or is it pointing to the second most recent allocation or or or older allocations than the second most recent allocation because you know depending on how many allocations were made by create tree head may point to either the most so if for example create tree didn't make any allocation at all then head may point to a one the most recent allocation on the other hand if create tree made exactly one allocation then head may point to a two if create tree made more than one allocations then head may point all to a last and so it's not clear whether you know so so the graph the the points two relationships now become less precise because I mean because we using the allocate the recency abstraction because at compile time it may be impossible or undecidable to figure out how many nodes will create tree allocate and because of that it seems that head because of that imprecision the compile time analysis the main alias analysis may conservatively determine that hey head can point to or the main points to analysis make conservatively determine that head may point to a one or it may point to a two or it may point to a last and maybe because you know you through some analysis you are able to figure out that the last node that is allocated in create tree is the is the root node so you maybe the analysis is able to figure out that root still points to the most recently allocated object so root will point to a one either root will point to nothing in which case it's okay or it if it points to something then it will point to a one now this kind of a picture is less satisfactory than the picture that we had less in the previous figure because here we have lot we don't have the precision is much less in we I mean we are not able to reason about the fact that head you know the structure of the data structure is completely lost it seems like head can point anywhere A1 can point anywhere A2 can point anywhere and so on and this is this is not this is not you know this is not very precise and very useful for most applications so while the recency abstraction was one idea on how you could partition the object we've seen a weakness of the recency abstraction because sometimes it may not be possible to figure out how many allocations are happening in a particular piece it's a fragment of the program in which case you have to conservatively assume that any number of allocations may happen and that fragment of the program and that may cause spurious edges in the points to graph this this relationship between the points to relationships denoted by these edges is represented as is also called a points to graph where the node if a node in a points to graph points to another object then basically means that the value stored in that object for example in this case head may may have a pointer to an object of type A1 and similarly a value stored in A1 may have an a pointer to an object of class A last and so on okay so to resolve the problem of the recency abstraction here's another idea how about we use different types depending on the type of the allocation we group the different allocations into different abstract objects so for example all the objects of type L node will be called will be represented by abstract object L node and all the allocations of type T node which is T node represents in tree node for the create tree function that are not shown although we'll have a separate abstract class called T node that represents all the concrete objects that are allocated for T node at runtime now if we use the type abstraction this this this it becomes much the the the points to graph for this program becomes much much better because it seems like head may point to L node but head will not point will never point to T node further in L node through the next pointer may point to itself similarly the root may point to T node and the T node through the left and right pointers may point to other objects in the class T node but neither T node may point to L node not not L node may point to T node head may not point to L node and root will not point to L node. Head will not point to T node and root will not point to L node. so this is a, this is much better information than what we had in the previous points to graph. in the previous points to graph it seemed like both head and root may point to the same thing here at least we have this information that head will not point to the same thing as root or in other words head and root will not alias at runtime through this type of abstraction however none of these abstractions are perfect for example even in the type abstraction let's Let's take an example where the type abstraction actually does not work that well. So let's say I have these statements x equals new capital X and y equals new capital Y. Now because these two are different, capital X and capital Y are different types, I'll have different abstract objects, capital X and capital Y in my set of abstract objects. And my points to graph would look something like this. So if I do x.f equals y, that would basically mean that inside the object small x, I have a pointer to an object y, which is of type capital Y. So which means that small x, first of all, may point to an object of type capital X. Small y may point to an object of type capital Y because of these two new statements. And finally, because of this statement x.f equals y, a pointer inside capital X, an object of type capital X or an object of class capital X may have a pointer to an object of class capital Y. And that pointer may be stored in the field f. That information is not shown in the points to graph. But the point is that a pointer inside an object of abstract class X may contain a pointer to an object that belongs to the abstract class Y. And that's what this edge here represents. Now this is what the type abstraction gives me for this program. But let me make this program slightly different. So let's say I create another variable z of the same type capital Y as the original variable small y. And in this case, once again, because I use the type-based abstraction, it seems like small z can point to an object of type capital Y. So I'm drawing edge from z to capital Y. And let's say at some other point in the program, I say z equals new capital And capital Z is, let's say, a different type. Maybe one is a derived type and one is a base type or something like that. In which case, small z may point either to an object of class capital Z or it may point to an object of class capital Y. And this is what a points to graph looks like in this example. Now, notice that this points to graph has an imprecision already because it seems like both y and z may point to the same object. In other words, star y and star z may alias because they may point to the same object. Whereas, if you look at the original program, it's very clear that there's nowhere in the program where z is being assigned the same, where we're basically assigning the same pointer in z, which was actually held in y. And so this is an imprecision in the points to graph. And this imprecision is largely arising because of the abstraction that we have made, which is the type abstraction. Now, how does this make things hard? Because let's say there was another statement called z dot dot g equals x. So in other words, whatever is z pointing to, in this case, z may point to y or z. Now, that can contain a pointer to x, which means an object in type y, because z can point to y, can now contain a pointer to x. And an object of type z can now contain a pointer to x. So these edges from y to x and z to x represent the possibilities created by this statement, z dot g equals x. Once again, these are imprecisions because, after all, z couldn't have alias with capital, z couldn't have pointed to capital, you know, to the same object at small y. And now it seems like through y, I can reach capital X, whereas, actually, in the program, I can reach capital X through z, but never through y. And so these imprecisions are an artifact of the type abstraction. Similarly, if I have another statement said z dot f equals y, then it seems like small z is pointing to capital Z. So capital Z can point to capital Y. And because small z is also pointing to capital Y, capital Y can point to itself, and so on. And the more the edges in the points to graph, the less imprecise the points to graph is. I mean, ideally, the best points to graph is the points to graph which has as few edges as possible. Of course, the analysis is still sound, but still needs to remain sound. But the fewer the edges, the more precise the analysis. And it seems like we're adding a lot of spurious edges because of the type abstraction in this example. On the other hand, instead of a type abstraction, I used another scheme to create this object abstraction. And this scheme is called the allocation site abstraction. In the allocation site abstraction, for each statement in the program, I label it with the corresponding PC. So let's say this allocation site is PC1, this allocation site is PC2, this allocation site is PC4, z equals nu y. Notice that even though they are both allocating an object of the same type, the allocation sites of the fourth statement and the second statement are different because the PCs are different. And similarly, z equals nu capital Z is an allocation site 7. So my points to graph now looks very different for the same program, but with the allocation site abstraction. Here, what I do is I say, because any object that is allocated at PC1 is represented by abstract object 1, and small x can point to 1, small y can point to an abstracted object 2. Because of x.f equals y, because x can point to an allocation site 1 object, so 1 can now point to 2, and y can point to 2 an allocation site 2 object. Because of x.f equals y, we can say that 1 can point to 2. And say z equals nu y, so that means z can now point to an allocation site 4. Now, this is the place where the precision improvement happens. Earlier in the type abstraction, z could have pointed either to 4 or either to, now z was pointing to y, which was also pointed to by small y. But in this allocation site abstraction, z is pointing to 4, while small y is pointing to 2. And it's clear that z, whatever star z is, it cannot alias with star y because they're pointing to different abstract objects. So the allocation site abstraction seems more precise than the type abstraction in this example. Similarly, when we say z.g equals x, so whatever z is pointing to, which is 4, can point to whatever x is pointing to, which is 1. So we draw an edge from 4 to 1. And say z.f equals y, so once again, 4 can point to 2 this time because z can point to 4 and y can point to 2, so z 4 can point to 2. And then say z equals nu capital Z. Because z equals nu capital Z, this is the seventh allocation site number 7. So now z can point to 7. And now because of these statements, because z.g equals x and z.f equals y, once I say that z points to 7, then I also need to consider these statements. And I'm going to use a fixed point algorithm, a DFL algorithm, to figure this out, that if z can point to 7 and z.g equals x, which means whatever z can point to can point to whatever x can point to, then 7 can point to 1. And similarly, 7 can point to 2 because of z.f equals y. And this is the final points to a graph that is obtained by an allocation site abstraction. We're going to see an algorithm to draw these points to graphs automatically later on. But in this module, I'm primarily interested in identifying the different abstractions and their trade-offs. So for this example, the type abstraction is less precise because it introduces more edges than the allocation site abstraction, which has less edges and better or less. I guess I can't directly compare the number of edges because the number of abstract objects is also different in the two cases. But less aliasing relationships are possible in this points to graph than in this points to graph. For example, in this points to graph, star y cannot alias with star z, whereas in this points to graph, star y can alias with star z. Finally, for our linked list example, if I use the allocation site abstraction, then there were at least two allocation sites. One was the allocation site that was allocating an L node for create list. And there was another allocation site that may be a part of the create tree function that's allocating the tree node. And if I use the allocation site abstraction, the points to graph looks something like this. Head may point to an object allocated at allocation site one, and an object allocated at allocation site one may point to itself through the next pointer. Similarly, the root may point to an object of allocation site two, and an object of allocation site two may point to itself through the next pointer. And once again, this looks like a nice neat graph that allows us to reason about several aliasing and points to relationships, and rule out several may point to relationships. And so the allocation site abstraction works well for this example where there's both a list and a tree, unlike the recency abstraction, which didn't work that well. Here's another example. Let's say the create list function was called twice. Here's an example where the allocation site abstraction actually creates more imprecision than desirable. So because both head and head two are calling the same function to create the list, there's only one allocation site that's basically representing both the lists created by both the functions, both the function calls. And so it seems like HD may point to one, and one may point to itself, but also HD two may point to one, and one may point to itself. Whereas root may still point to only objects and allocated at allocation site two. Now this allocation site abstraction based points to graph is still better than the recency based points to graph, but it has imprecisions. For example, it seems to imply that star head may alias with star head two, whereas we can see from the code that that's not true. So, you know, allocation site is working better for the example that we have discussed so far, but even it has imprecisions, and we've seen one example of an imprecision. We're going to see ways to get rid of these imprecisions later on. In general, it is possible to combine the multiple abstractions. For example, you can have, for example, the type abstraction may create a set of abstract objects, a1 dot dot an. Let's say an allocation site abstraction may create yet another set of abstract objects, let's say b1 dot dot bm. Then you can take a Cartesian product of them, and that would be the total number of abstract objects to potentially get more precision than any single abstraction. As long as we obey the discipline that the total number of abstract objects is finite, any abstraction is okay. Of course, there's a trade-off between how many abstract objects we want to create, even though they're finite, if we take Cartesian products, they can become exponential very quickly, and the precision, so the more the abstract objects, maybe you can get better precision, but at the cost of higher run time of the points to analysis.
