Title: Compiler Design Module 97 : Product of Semilattices
Video ID: pbaceICaPrA
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

We've been talking about semi-lattices and what are the different ways of representing a semi-lattice. And to summarize, there are three ways to represent or define a semi-lattice. One of them is basically using a set of values v and a meet operator. So the meet operator is represented using the carrot symbol and it needs to be idempotent, which means x meet x should give you x. It needs to be commutative and associative. Alright, now the second way of defining a semi-lattice is using a partial order or the less than equal to operator. So once again we have a set of values and a partial order. The requirements on the less than equal to operator or the ordering operator is that it needs to be reflexive, which is x is less than equal to x. It needs to be anti-symmetric, which means if x is less than equal to y and y is less than equal to x that must mean that x and y are equal. And transitive, x is less than equal to y and y is less than equal to z should imply that x is less than equal to z. Now there was a third way of specifying a semi-lattice and that's through using a graph with nodes and edges. And you can also draw a picture of this graph. And so this is a directed graph or digraph with nodes and edges. It should have no cycles, so it's a directed acyclic graph or a dig. And it can have top and bottom nodes, which are basically every node is nothing but a value. And edges are basically representing the partial ordering relationship where something is less than x is less than equal to y if there is a path from x to y in this graph. So one thing to notice here is that top and bottom may not necessarily exist. Maybe there is no top element or maybe there are multiple top elements or similarly maybe there is multiple bottom elements or maybe there is nothing like top or nothing like bottom. And why could this happen? For example, if v was a set of integers and let's say the meet operator was max, then the top is actually, you know, basically if the meet operator is max, it basically means that less than equal to is nothing but greater than, you know, the integer greater than equal to relation. So my semi lattice for something like this set of integers and max is going to look like the following. This is a semi lattice diagram, the graphical representation. We'll have integers arranged in a straight line with edges being drawn from every integer to its successor. So 0 to 1, 1 to 2. In other words, in this particular semi lattice, 2 is less than equal to 1. Although in integer theory, 2 will be called greater than equal to 1. In this particular semi lattice where the meet operator is max, the less than equal to definition for the semi lattice is actually the greater than equal to definition for actual integers. But the point I'm making here is that in this particular semi lattice, there is no top and there is no bottom because it basically goes on all the way till minus infinity on the top and it goes all the way to plus infinity on the bottom. And, you know, in plus infinity and minus infinity are not actually actual values. It basically means that it just keeps going on forever. Alright, so, you know, this is a valid semi lattice formed by int comma max where max is the meet operator. And, you know, we also discussed how you can easily derive the partial order from the meet operator. And I'll leave it as an exercise. But you may be interested in deriving the fact that the less than equal to operator for the semi lattice is nothing but the greater than equal to operator in integer theory. Alright, so semi lattices for DFA problems can often become large, right? So we, in our previous slide, we looked at a semi lattice that actually had an infinite number of values from minus infinity to plus infinity. But what about actual semi lattices that appear in data flow analysis problems? And so we have already seen some data flow analysis semi lattices which involve sets of values. So, for example, we had sets of variables or sets of definitions. And in these semi lattices, the set of values is basically sets of, so a value is nothing but a set of variables, right? So how many different values are possible? Well, if there are n variables in my program, then there are two to the power n different sets, distinct sets that I can create out of those n variables. And so what is the size of V, which is a set of values in my semi lattice? It's actually two to the power n, right? And so because n can be pretty large for a reasonably large program, maybe, you know, maybe a hundred lines of code or thousand lines of code or even 10,000 or million lines of code, the number of variables can be proportional to that. So let's say 100,000 or 10,000. And so two to the power 100,000 is a very, very large number. And that's actually the size of the semi lattice on which we are computing our data flow analysis. So the point is that the semi lattices for DFA problems can often become very large, all right? And so one idea here is to represent semi lattices using product of smaller semi lattices, all right? So we can take a product of semi lattices to obtain larger semi lattices and to see how that may work. Let's say you have two semi lattices. One has set of values V1 and its own partial order, let's say less than equal to one. And then another semi lattice has set of values V2, which may or may not overlap with V1. And another set of another partial order relation called less than equal to two. Now I can take a product of these semi lattices and I'm going to call it, the set of values will be formed by the Cartesian product of the two sets V1 and V2, right? So for every element x1 in V1 and x2 in V2, there exists an element x1, x2 in V1 cross V2. So if V1 has m elements and V2 has n elements, then the number of elements in V1 cross V2 is m into n. And also we need to define a less than equal to operator on this product semi lattice. And we define it as follows. We say x1, x2, which is a value in V1 cross V2, is less than equal to y1, y2, if and only if x1 is less than equal to y1 and x2 is less than equal to y2. So we can define a product in this way. And using products, we can basically construct larger semi lattices and it would still be a valid partial order with this definition in the sense that it would still obey our properties of reflexivity, anti-symmetry and transitivity. Another way to say the same thing would have been to basically represent the semi lattice using a meet operator. So I could have said that V1, meet 1 and V2, meet 2. So here I am trying to define a product using the individual meet operators. So let's say my semi lattices were defined using the meet operator, then I can say that x1, x2 meet of y1, y2. I want to define this and where meet is for the product lattice. So I can subscript it using 1 cross 2. So this is meet 1, this is meet 2 and this is meet 1 cross 2. So what is x1, x2 meet of y1, y2? Well, we can derive from this definition that x1, x2 meet of y1, y2 would be nothing but x1 meet 1, y1, x2 meet 2, y2. And that's another interesting kind of duality between the less than equal to operator and the meet operator. So if the meet operator is defined as this, then if the partial order is defined as this, then the meet operator turns out to be this and vice versa. So I could have actually specified the product lattice, product semi lattice as using the meet operators by defining the meet operator of the product semi lattice in terms of the meet operators of the individual lattices and I would have and I could derive this definition from that. So all these definitions are equivalent and that's a very interesting fact about semi lattices and I'll kind of leave this again as exercise for you to derive this on your own. All right, so here is an example of product of semi lattices. So let's say I was interested in doing reaching definitions and here my set of values is basically sets of definitions. So a single value is a single set of definitions. So what I could do is I could create different semi lattices for different definitions. For example, definition D1, I create a semi lattice with two values. One is the empty set and one is the full set which is the set that contains the only definition D1. Similarly, I could create another semi lattice for D2 which is also going to have two values the empty set and the full set which is the singleton set that contains D2. And for each of these semi lattices, I would define the less than equal to operator. In case of reaching definitions, recall that the less than equal to is nothing but superset and so the arrow will be drawn from the empty set to the full set and that's true for both cases. Now if I take the product of these two semi lattices, I get the following My product lattice is going to have four elements, Cartesian product. So the first element is going to be empty comma empty, the second is going to be empty comma D2, the third is going to be D1 comma empty and the fourth is going to be D1 comma D2. Moreover, I can also draw edges for my less than equal to operator and basically I draw an edge only if each of the elements in the tuple are individually obeying the less than equal to operation in their respective semi lattice. So because empty set is less than equal to empty set and D2 is less than equal to empty set, I can draw this edge. Similarly, I can draw this edge to D1 comma empty set and similarly I could draw these edges at the bottom. And once again, I avoid drawing edges that are already covered by transitive parts in this semi lattice diagram. But we know that D1 comma D2, this semi lattice diagram implies the fact that D1 comma D2 is less than equal to empty comma empty. Moreover, we can interpret these values which are actually ordered tuples as just sets and basically we could just say okay, we just take the union of these ordered values and kind of treat them like that. This really depends on the particular problem that you're interested in and whether it is okay to do this or not. But if it's okay to do this, then I could just take the union of the two parts of this ordered tuple and again, this would give me empty, this would give me just D2, D1 and D1 comma D2. And so this is one example where I have composed or taken a product of two individual semi lattices, each of which had was basically a semi lattice for a single definition to create a larger semi lattice that has two definitions. Then I could keep doing this and generalize this to N different definitions.
