Title: Compiler Design Module 72 : Optimization Overview
Video ID: dK8SjttPNG4
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

So now we're going to start discussing optimization on the intermediate representation. So most IRs are organized as a control flow graph over basic blocks, all right? So what is a control flow graph? We're also going to call it a CFG for short. 

Firstly, let's review what is a basic block. Recall that a basic block is a single entry, single exit, straight line, code segment. So for example, this rectangle here has multiple incoming edges and multiple outgoing edges. By incoming edges, I mean, there are incoming control flow. Each edge represents a potential incoming control flow from a different basic block. And similarly, outgoing edges basically represent outgoing control flow. And so in this particular case, this rectangle is supposed to represent straight line code segment, which has only a single entry because the only entries are at the first instruction, beginning of the first instruction, and single exit because the only exits are at the end of the last instruction. And so this particular thing is a basic, code segment is a basic block. Here are some examples of code segments that are not basic blocks. So here, this rectangle has only one incoming edge and one outgoing edge, but it has outgoing edges from the middle of the code segment. And that means that it's not a basic block because it's no longer a single exit basic block. Similarly, here, there's a basic block, but it has an entry to the middle of the basic block and we are not going to call it a basic block therefore. And so this is also not a basic block. And let's look at this fourth example. Here, there is only a single entry and a single exit, and there is no incoming edge to any of the other code, but it's not a straight line sequence of instructions, because in this, there's a branching, and then there's a meeting, join point, and there's a branch point. And although in this whole larger red rectangle does not have any incoming edge, neither does it have any outgoing edge except at the end, and it has only the incoming edges at the beginning. It is not a basic block because it's not a straight line code segment. So all three conditions, single entry, single exit, and straight line should be met for it to be called a basic block. 

So here's an example for optimization inside a basic block. So let's say this is my basic block. It is labeled with a label L so that the other parts of the code can jump to this basic blocks by saying jump L or go to L or branch L. And then it has, let's say, three statements. The first one says T equals two into X, assigns two into X to T. Then the third one says W equals T plus X. And the last one says if W is greater than three, go to L prime. Now there are some optimizations that you can imagine. Firstly, it is okay to change three to W equals three into X. For some reason, if addition of two variables is cheaper, is more costly than multiplication by a constant, then it may be cheaper to actually do W equals three into X rather than doing W equals T plus X because T we know is just two into X and this would be an optimization. I'm not discussing how we're going to perform this optimization, but I'm just saying that this could be a potential optimization. Now similarly, it is okay, is it okay to change four to, if X is greater than one, go to L prime. So four is basically if W is greater than three, go to L prime. And because we know W equals three into X, can we say W greater than three is the same as saying X greater than one by just dividing both sides by three? Well, it turns out the answer here is no, okay? Because three into X being greater than three is a different condition from X being greater than one because three into X, here X is not an infinite integer. It is a finite bounded integer and three into X could mean overflow and wraparound and things like that. And so there exist values of X for which three into X is greater than three, but X is not greater than one, all right? And so one has to be careful. For the first one, the answer is yes, all right? And is it okay to remove two, right? So because we have already said we have replaced this with two into three into X, is it now okay to get rid of two? Is it okay to do that? Well, the answer, it depends, right? So it depends. It depends on whether T is being used later on in the code or not. And so we need to be worried about that. So this example is just giving you three types of optimizations or transformations. One of them is clearly okay. One of them is clearly not okay. And the third one depends. You can't really decide whether you can do it or not just by looking at this particular code segment. You also need to look at the rest of the program to be able to say that. And so that's the third one. 

Okay, so now let's define a control flow graph or CFG. A CFG is a directed graph where basic blocks are the nodes. And there's an edge from block A to block B if the execution can pass from the last instruction in A to the first instruction in B, all right? And this is something that we've been assuming and drawing in our figures already. But now we define it more formally. And so what is the control flow graph? It is a directed graph. Where basic blocks are nodes and there's an edge from block A to block B if the execution can potentially pass from the last instruction in A to the first instruction in B. 

So here are some examples of where the edge is going. So for example, if I have an unconditional branch at the end of a basic block to a label L, then I will draw an edge from this basic block to the basic block that represents L. Similarly, if I have a conditional branch at the end of a basic block, so it's a B, E, Q, R1, R2, L, it basically means that if R1 equals R2, then go to L. So then I will have an edge from this basic block to the basic block representing L. But then I will also have an edge from this basic block to the successor basic block, the basic block that just follows this particular basic block in the code instruction order, all right? So there are two edges that are coming out. One that's going to L and the other that's going to the next basic block. And this kind of an edge is also called a fall through edge, okay? Because it just falls through to the next basic block. And similarly, here's the third thing. Here, there is no branch, but there is a basic block. It has some instructions. And then after the execution, the last instruction, the natural thing for the computer to do would be to execute the first instruction in the following basic block because these are successive basic blocks. But they happen to be in different basic blocks because this second basic block, so let me call this B and let me call this A. So basic block B has two incoming edges. And so it has to be a separate basic block from A. It can't be merged with A because that's by the definition of basic block. And although there is no branch instruction, neither unconditional nor conditional, just the fall through semantics are going to give you an edge from A to B. And so this also is basically a fall through edge. 

All right. So here's an example of a CFG. So maybe, you initialize X to one and then I to one, and then you have maybe have a label L and you say X equals X into X, I equals I plus one. And if I is less than 10, go to L. So this is probably just computing something with some power of X and it's doing this 10 times. It's saying X into X and doing that 10 times. And then this is a loop, right? So I gets incremented by one until it becomes 10, in which case you just return from the function body. All right. So notice that this is a control flow graph where there is a cycle in the graph and that represents a loop. And you can imagine that such a control flow graph can be created using a program which contains a while construct or a fall construct in your program. So the body of a method can be represented as a CFG, a control flow graph, and such a CFG will have one entry node. This is the initial node at which the execution will start. And it could have multiple terminal nodes which will represent all the return statements in the procedure. So maybe your language allows multiple return statements in your procedure, just like C or C plus plus or Java, in which case all those return statements would be the terminal basic blocks or terminal nodes in your CFG. 

So what do we want to do in terms of optimization? We are going to typically operate on this control flow graph of the intermediate representation, treat it as a graph and then try to improve things just like the example that we saw a couple of slides back. And then we are going to try to improve, we are going to typically try to improve the program's resource utilization for some resource. Sometimes it is the execution time that we are interested in, and most often this is the most important resource that we are usually optimizing for. But for other applications, it may be more important to optimize for code size. Now I should point out that these are not exclusive. Maybe optimizing for code size also optimizes for execution time, and that's actually often true. And so it's not true that just optimizing for code size means that you must necessarily pay a price. It's not necessarily a trade-off. It may actually be well-aligned goals. Or you could be optimizing for memory usage. So maybe you want to optimize the amount of extra memory that is created on the heap, or in the data section, or on the stack, or the number of disk IO operations that the program makes, or the number of network IO operations that the program makes. And here also there can be more fine-grained metrics. For example, you may want to optimize for the number of round trips that you make to the disk, or the number of round trips that you make to the network. Alternatively, you may not care about the round trips. You may want to optimize for the amount of bandwidth that your program is going to take on the disk channel or on the network link and things like that. And finally, you may be interested in optimizing for power consumption, especially for battery-operated devices like smartphones or internet of thing devices, IoT devices. Power consumption is a big thing. Often it's, sometimes it's power consumption that you're optimizing for. Sometimes it's energy consumption that you're optimizing for. Energy and power are two different things. Typically optimizing for energy also comes from just optimizing the execution time because it's shorter. If the program can finish quicker, then it is going to use less energy, right? Energy is just power into time. And so typically, often you're not optimizing for power, but you're optimizing for energy. And usually if you're optimizing for execution time, or automatically are also optimizing for energy. 

Now, one important point, optimization should not alter what the program computes. Typically, that's what we think about optimization. The program, the implementation should still conform to the meaning of the program. And recall that we specified the meaning of a program using semantic rules. For example, we discussed operational semantics for a toy language. And so that meaning should be always obeyed. So optimization should never try to transgress those boundaries of meaning. Although, in the modern world, there are also ideas of approximate computing and things like that, especially for things like neural networks where the whole notion of correctness is not very well-defined. And so it's okay if you are making some errors here or there. But even in those cases, there are some boundaries to what you can tolerate in terms of error in the result of the program. For our purposes, we're gonna assume that the value computation results are exact. And so whatever is the value that's been computed and that's observable by an external user should remain intact in the face of optimizations. For example, I just gave you an example that let's say W equals C into X. And the original program is if W greater than three go to L, it is not okay to convert this to if X greater than one go to L because these two conditions, W greater than three and X greater than one are completely different conditions because they become true for, there exist points, there exist values for X where one is true and the other is not. And so one has to be careful about that. 

Here are the typical granularities of optimization. One is called local optimizations. And these are optimizations that apply to a basic block in isolation. So you can just look at a basic block and say, oh, I can do this optimization. For example, we have seen a local optimization where we would say W equals two into X and then T equals W plus X and then we said T equals three to X. So that would be a local optimization. We can just look at a basic block in isolation without having to worry about the rest of the program and say, oh, I can optimize it. And that would be a local optimization. These are typically the easiest to implement. Then there are a category of optimizations that are called global optimizations and these apply to a CFG, which represents a method body in isolation. So I can just look at the body of a method as a CFG, as a control flow graph and then say, oh, by the way, I can optimize this, I can optimize this. But I'm looking at the whole body in isolation. I'm not looking at other method bodies when I'm doing these optimizations. And the third category of optimizations are interprocedural optimization. Here we apply optimizations across method boundaries. So I can say that, oh, I know that this method is being called by that method and the values that that method uses are constrained in this way and so I can optimize this method accordingly and so on. And so such optimizations are called interprocedural optimizations. Interprocedural optimizations are usually the hardest to implement because they require the maximum amount of reasoning or larger code region, but they're also often the most effective in terms of their savings that they produce in terms of resource usage. 

Optimization, unfortunately, is not a science. It's more of an art. And the current state of the art here is that we typically want to get the maximum benefit for the minimum cost because there is no, you know, we don't have the optimal program for a given specification is an undecidable problem. So you cannot hope to have the optimal program for most programs. And so what you do is you're basically just making some improvements here or there and how much improvement you want to make, you know, there's a cost. There's a cost of development which people need to, humans need to expand to be able to do those optimizations. And then let's say it took me, you know, one month to develop that optimization. If that optimization only makes, you know, 0.01% change in the speed of, you know, 1% of the programs that run in the world, that's not, you know, maybe the best use of my time. On the other hand, if maybe one, after one month of effort, if I can make, you know, 10% of the program running in the world, 0.1% faster, that would be a worthwhile use of my time. Okay, because 10% of all the programs running in the world, making them 0.1% faster is actually a significant improvement because, you know, that much energy saved because there's a lot of programs running in the world and, you know, saving 0.1% for 10% of the programs is going to be a significant amount of energy saved, for example, or runtime saved, for example. All right, so some optimizations are hard to implement. So you would probably just not implement them even though they were effective. They say, oh, they are too hard to implement and we're not going to implement them. And there's a large category of optimizations that fall in this category. And so what has happened is that initially they were not implemented but then over the years, as compilers became more and more mature, more and more complicated optimizations started getting added to the compiler. And this is a continuously growing curve. If you recall one of our initial lectures, we just showed that how compiler complexity has been growing over the years. And one of the reason is because more and more complex optimizations are getting implemented inside the compiler. Some optimizations require large compilation time. So some optimizations require complex reasoning in the computer. And so they require large compilation time. And that's often not a good idea, especially for developers who are doing this test debug loop, in which case, you know, having to recompile over and over again where the compilation time is large is not a good idea. And so maybe some optimization gets rejected because of that. And then some optimizations have a low payoff. So doing an optimization may not actually yield much benefit and in which case it's not worth spending your time on it. But often it's very hard to quantify the payoff because doing one optimization actually enables other optimizations and things like that.
