Title: Compiler Design Module 16 : Abstract Syntax Tree
Video ID: tdygrKkz28s
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

Alright, in this module I am going to introduce the idea of an abstract syntax tree or AST for short. So recall that after legsync we get a stream of tokens and that stream of tokens is input to the parser and from the output of the parser is a derivation tree or a parse tree. Now what is a parse tree? That's actually the actual structure of the program, the way to interpret it. So just like in English if I write a sentence it's just a sequence of words but when I read the sentence then I actually form a mental model which is a parse tree which basically represents the meaning or the structure of the sentence. So the parse tree is the actual program representation, so to say, I mean the identified, the inferred structure of the program and a common way to represent this structure is the abstract syntax tree which is very similar to the parse tree but it just omits some details. So it omits some details that were kind of only relevant to the parsing step and once the parsing step is over we don't really care about those extra details, we just care about what was the structure of the sentence or the program. So we'll see examples to understand this. So let's say there was a grammar which says E can produce an integer, a constant integer maybe 5, 2, 3 whatever or a parenthesized E or E plus E. So this is the grammar and here is a sequence of characters 5 plus 2 plus 3. Now after lexing, this sequence of characters is turned into tokens, so for example the character 5 is converted into token int, 5, so the 5 integer plus then there is a plus token which I am representing with plus in the single quotes, open parenthesis integer 2 plus integer 3 closed parenthesis. So lexers converts a sequence of characters to a sequence of tokens. The next step is parsing and in the parser we convert the sequence of tokens into a parse tree. So for example the sequence of tokens should be producible from the top level start symbol which is E in this case and so the parse tree basically shows the derivation of this sequence from the top level symbol E. So for example you could say E produces E plus E, the first E produces the token int, in this case int 5, the second E produces parenthesized E which in turn produces another E plus E and finally they produce 2 plus 3. And so this entire parse tree represents the structure of the sentence 5 plus 2 plus 3. Notice that this parse tree encodes the association, for example you are supposed to first add 2 and 3 before adding 5 to it. So it indicates association and it's supposed to produce the same sequence of tokens that was a part of the program earlier. Now there are some external, this structure of the program is what the rest of the compilation phases care about. They really don't care about how this was arrived at. We only want to know whether it's the semantic analysis phase or the optimization phase and things like that, the code generation phase. The only thing we care about is what was the structure of the program and things like that. So we don't care about the linear sequence of tokens anymore. However, this structure of the program that's represented as a parse tree has some extra details. For example, I really don't need to know that there was a bracket or not. I really don't care whether there was a bracket or not. I also don't care about these non-terminals, capital E's. So why do I need the capital E's? I don't care how these were derived. What I really care about is what are the operations in the program or in this case in the expression and then how are they associated, right? And so that's what an abstract syntax tree is going to represent. So it's a stripped down version of the parse tree such that it is easier to interpret. It doesn't have all the extraneous details and that's exactly what an abstract syntax tree is. So in this example, for example, the abstract syntax tree would look something like the following. There are two operators, plus. The plus operator is a binary operator. So the first operand is in this case is int five. The second operator, the second operand of the top level plus is another expression that is represented by another subtree of the AST, which is plus int two and int three. Notice that the AST is isomorphic with the original parse tree just that we have gotten rid of some extraneous information like parentheses, non terminals and other syntactic sugar that is no longer needed. And for the rest of the compilation phases, we are only going to operate on the abstract syntax tree or AST.
