Title: Compiler Design Module 157 : Parallelization with a Constant Amount of Synchronization
Video ID: BHvsBQJmn5c
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

So far, we have looked at synchronization-free parallelism. But now today, I'm going to show some examples where synchronization-free is not going to give you parallelism. But if you put a little bit of synchronization, and this I call a constant amount of synchronization, constant in the size of the iteration space, so it's independent of the size of the iteration space, then we will be able to get better parallelism than if we just don't put any synchronization at all. So I'm going to motivate that synchronization is sometimes required in today's module. And let's look at this example. For i equals 0 to n, i++, for j equals 0 to m, j++, xij plus equals some function of x i minus 1j. Now, what this basically means is that the i comma jth iteration is dependent on i minus 1 comma jth iteration. There's a read-after-write dependency. Because in the i minus 1jth iteration, the i minus 1jth element is written. And in the i comma jth iteration, the i minus 1 comma jth element is read. So there is a dependency from i minus 1 comma j to i comma j, where these are basically representing iteration points. And so if I was to parallelize, I would basically say that, OK, it's like saying that if the value of j is same, then all the elements for the same value of j have data dependencies. But across different values of j, they are data independent. And so if I use my space partitioning constraints, I'm going to get a solution that maps every distinct value of j to a distinct processor, a rank 1 solution. So in other words, if i was the x-axis and j was the y-axis, then all the horizontal strands would, each horizontal strand would be mapped to the same processor. But different horizontal strands would be mapped to different processors. OK, but now let me change this program slightly. And let me add another loop nest. And in this loop nest, I say for i equals 0 to n, j equals 1 to some other bounds. It doesn't really matter. I could have used m, but I'm just using m minus 10 just to kind of say that the bounds can be different. So let's say i equals j plus plus, xij plus equals some function g of xij minus 1. Now this time, just like in my previous loop nest, there was a dependency across different values of i. In this loop nest, the dependencies across different values of j. And so it's like, once again, for the same value of i and different values of j, I have data dependencies. And for the same values of i, I have data independent iterations. And so if I again use my space partitioning constraints, I would obtain a rank one solution. And this time, for every different value of i, I would use a different processor. And this would be my maximum rank solution for my space partitioning constraints. Now both these are giving me different parallelization solutions. The first loop nest is giving me p equals j. And the second loop nest is giving me p equals i. But let's see what happens when I basically try to parallelize, using synchronization-free parallelism, a program that has both the loops together. In this case, I basically want, I'm going to say that actually this loop, if I look at both the loops together and use my space partitioning constraints for synchronization-free parallelization, then I'm going to find that it is not parallelizable. And why is it not parallelizable? Well, the first loop nest is going to say that if the values of j are same, then they must belong to the same processor. That's why we got p equals j. So if the values of j are same, then the iterations should map to the same processor. What's that second loop nest? It says if the values of i are same, then they must map to the same processor. And if you combine the two, it basically means that all the points should map to the same processor. Because if I go horizontally, that's the same value of i. And if I go vertically, that's the same value of j. So if I take any two points in the iteration space, I can find a transitive data dependency from any i1, j1 to any i2, j2, by first going on i and then going on j. This can be seen diagrammatically. The first loop nest says that if I plot j on the x axis, because it's in the inner loop, and i on the y axis, because it's the outer loop, then the data dependencies are these vertical strands, right? And so because of these data dependencies, I want to say that all these points on this vertical strand should map to the same processor. Similarly, all the points on this vertical strand should map on the same processor, and so on. But now if I look at the second new loop nest, it's the same axis, j and i, but this time I get horizontal data dependencies for the same value of i. Which means that this horizontal strand should map on the same processor, and this horizontal strand should map on the same processor. And I claim that the only affine function that can satisfy both these constraints is the affine function of rank 0, which just maps all these iterations to the same processor ID, let's say 0. So it's also easy to see. This one and this one should have the same processor, and this one and this one should have the same processor. So this one and this one should also have the same processor. And so basically if I just combine these two, I basically get a diagram like this. And this basically means that everything has a data dependency on everything else, and that just means that you cannot have any parallelization, and the entire program, all the iteration points in the iteration space should map to the same processor. But that was synchronization-free parallelism, because I just didn't want any sort of synchronization in my program. But it is easy to see that if I was able to split this program into two different programs, then I can exploit parallelism. In other words, I can basically parallelize this loopness separately and that loopness separately. But it's not so simple, because there are data dependencies from this statement, let's say S1, to this statement, let's say S2. Because things are being written to X in this statement, elements of X, and things are being read from the elements of S. So it's not like this loopness can be executed complete isolation from this loopness. But what we can probably say is that all iterations of this loopness must finish before any iteration of this loopness begins. And once we are able to say that, then I can basically parallelize each loopness independently. And so the first thing to notice here is that when considering constraints between S1 and S2, we get a rank zero solution based on the data dependencies and our space partitioning constraints for this particular program. And so we want a solution for this. And the solution is that we are going to add some kind of small amount of synchronization. So it's no longer going to be synchronization-free. All our space partitioning constraints were meant for synchronization-free parallelism. But now we are basically interested in identifying better solutions, even at the cost of putting a little bit of synchronization. And so the little bit of synchronization in this example that I will need is a barrier, which is a barrier between the two loopness. What is a barrier? A barrier basically says that this entire loopness should finish before any iteration of the second loopness starts. So it's like if I basically parallelize the first loopness, then all threads of the first loopness should kind of finish before I start executing any thread of the second loopness. And so if I do that, if I use a barrier synchronization between the two loopness, then I don't need to consider statements across barriers, because in a way I have kind of split the two programs, split the program into two parts, and basically said that the second part will execute only after the first part has finished. And so when I look for space partitioning constraints, then I only need to consider each part in isolation. Okay, and so what I can do is I can consider the first part in isolation, and I will be able to parallelize with P equals J, just like we saw before. And then I can look at the second part in isolation, and then I can parallelize it with P equals I. Important thing is that there will be one synchronization happening between the two loopness, which is a barrier synchronization which will cause some overhead, but it will be a small amount of overhead because I will just have to, you know, it's just one wait for the entire loop to finish. So if I had, let's say, 100 processors, then the first loop can be made 100x faster, but then I have to wait for all the threads to finish. So assuming that all threads are going to finish together, then I still have 100x faster execution. I wait for all the threads to finish, and then I start the second thread. In this case, again, I can now execute 100 threads in parallel, and so overall, I still get nearly 100x speedup on my 100 processors. So this is, you know, this is parallelization with some small amount of synchronization. And the important thing to note about the barrier synchronization is that all S1 iterations execute before any S2 iterations execute, all right? So this is what barrier synchronization means, and this is an important property that we require for doing this kind of transformation. Because, as I said, there are data dependencies from S1 to S2. There are, you know, whatever is being, you know, some elements that are being written or updated in S1 are being read in S2. So there are read after write dependencies. So I need to basically be sure that the S1 updates have finished before I start actually reading data from the matrix X, and so that's, the barrier synchronization allows me to do that. Okay, that was an example, that was my first example of why synchronization may sometimes be required. Here is my second example, which is slightly more interesting than the first example, because here, you know, the synchronization should be, is not kind of already, the barrier, where to place the barrier is not as clear as it was in the previous example. In the previous example, it was very clear the loopness were already separate, and I just put a barrier in between. By the way, we are interested in identifying compiler algorithms that are going to automatically identify where to put the barriers, and then give me a good amount of parallelism in my program. And so I'm just discussing what are the possible solutions, and then later on we're going to discuss algorithms to basically reach these solutions automatically through a compiler. So let's see, I have another program, and this is another example, my second example. For i equals zero to n, i plus plus, and this loop body has two statements, s1 and s2. The first statement says xi equals yi plus zi, and the second statement says w of a of i equals xi, all right? So the first statement is, you know, you can basically be very sure, you can identify for s1 the axis pattern, the capital F and small f using affine transforms, because they're just affine accesses. But for the second statement, the axis is not affine because I have a memory axis that depends on the value of ai, and the ai value could be arbitrary. And so when I'm doing compiler analysis, I cannot make assumptions on what is the value of ai, and so I have to make conservative assumptions that ai can point anywhere in w, and so there could be data dependencies across the iterations of i. So while the first statement is fully data parallel, it is embarrassingly parallel, because different iterations of i will access different elements of x, y, and z, but different iterations of i are not guaranteed to access different elements of w, because it's possible that a0 and a1 point to the same element, in which case it is necessary for me to not parallelize this sex statement s2, or it's necessary for me to preserve the order of s2. The other thing I want to point out is the, so what we have established so far is that there are no data dependencies between different iterations of s1. We have established that there may be data dependencies, and so conservatively we'll assume that there are data dependencies between different iterations of s2. And if I look at between s1 and s2, I would find that there are data dependencies between an iteration of s2 and iterations of s1 and iterations of s2, because I'm writing xi and I'm reading xi in s2. Can I parallelize this loop? So if I just use my synchronization-free parallelism algorithm using space partitioning constraints, I'm going to basically find that, oh, because of s2, all the iterations of s2 must map to the same processor. Moreover, because the order of s1 and s2 must be preserved, so s1 should basically, that would also basically require s1 to be executed before s2 for that particular iteration. And so basically the space partitioning constraints is going to tell me that both s1 and s2 should basically have a rank zero solution. So all of them should basically execute on the same processor. For s2, it is very obvious. For s1, this happens because of the data dependency on s2. So I cannot execute s1 in parallel because values returned by s1 are used by s2. And s2 is executing sequentially on a single processor and because it has data dependencies due to W. Now, I can potentially use some synchronization to basically make, if I use the synchronization-free parallelism, then I'm basically going to end up with a rank zero solution, but if I use a small amount of synchronization, then I will show that I can actually have better parallelism. And here is, so just to explain what I have already said in pictures, AI can access any element. So if I was to draw the dependency graph between s2, now there are, s2s are basically these circles and instances of s2 are these circles and instances of s1 are these crosses. So there are no dependencies across different crosses, but there are dependencies across different circles. And in fact, if there are n iterations, then there are n squared dependencies because I have to conservatively assume that AI could potentially alias for different values of I. And so there are dependencies across s2. Moreover, there are dependencies from iterations of x, s1, to iterations of s2. Now, okay, and if I basically use this, so actually maybe I have drawn this a little bit wrong. It's only s1s to s2. So maybe the picture is something like this. So s2 has all the data dependencies among themselves and iterations of s1 have data dependencies with their corresponding iterations in s2. But if I look at this graph, it basically looks, basically means that all these points are interconnected. And so the only solution is that all of them are mapped to the same processor because there's a data dependency from x to zero, zero to zero, x to not, not to not, and so on. And so everything is basically interconnected. And so there is really no parallelism. And when I say interconnected, basically means there are data dependencies. And so I cannot just parallelize them. I need to respect the ordering between their execution. Okay, so this is what my data dependency graph looks like, and let me just fix this one as well. So this was my data dependency graph. And what I'm going to do is I am going to transform this code in this way. So I'm going to do loop fission, which means I'm going to split the two statements in a single loop body into two different loops, right? So for i equals zero to n, i plus plus, for x i equals y i plus z i, and then another loop which says for i equals zero to n, wa i equals x i. Now it is okay to do this because the only dependencies were from x i to its corresponding iteration of the i-th iteration of S1 to the i-th iteration of S2, and their relative order is preserved in this loop fission transformation. For example, it wouldn't have been preserved if there was a dependency from the i-th iteration of S1 between the i-th iteration of S1 and the i minus 1-th iteration of S2. So in the original program, the i minus 1-th iteration of S2 would have executed before the i-th iteration of S1. In the new program, the i minus 1-th iteration of S2 would execute after the i-th iteration of the S1. But fortunately, the i minus 1-th iteration of S2 is not dependent on the i-th iteration of S1, and so that's why I can do this split fission of the loop and still have a correct implementation and implementation that's equivalent to my original program. And now what I can do is I can basically parallelize the first loop and have a barrier synchronization between the first loop and the second loop, just like we had in our first example, and that would give me better parallelism. The second loop will not get parallelized, but the first loop has order n parallelism. And so the new transform program looks like this. I first execute all the iterations of S1. These are all data-independent iterations, so I can execute them in parallel. Then I have a barrier, and then I execute all the iterations of S2, but this time I execute the iterations of S2 sequentially. So that's my transformation that is going to give me better parallelism, but it has a small amount of synchronization that is required, and in this case it is the barrier synchronization. And later on we are going to look at, in our next few modules, look at how to identify these transformations automatically through a compiler. So the first loop here becomes parallelizable, so S1 becomes parallelizable, whereas S2 remains sequential. And if I was to look at the generated code for this particular transformation, it would look something like the following. I'll have a for loop, which is a parallel for loop on the processors. For the first for loop, I just use synchronization-free parallelism to figure out that I get a rank one solution for this one depth loop, which is p equals i. So I just use p equals i, and i goes from zero to n, so p also goes from zero to n. So for p equals zero to n, p plus plus, and this is a parallel for loop, xp equals yp plus zp. And then I basically have a barrier, which basically says that, okay, maybe these statements are executing in parallel, but then I basically want a barrier. I could have written it in a different way as well. I could have, for example, just close this loop, then have the barrier, and then basically I don't need this if p equals zero and just execute it, the second loop sequentially. So notice that the first loop here is parallel, and the second loop here is sequential. Okay, so this is my transform program, which requires a barrier synchronization. It allows the first loop to get parallelized, and requires the second loop to be sequential. Notice that when I'm talking about synchronization, parallelization with synchronization, I'm really not so much concerned about locality. When we were talking about synchronization-free parallelism, even if there was only one processor, we were actually gaining locality because we were reducing the reuse distance. Here, we are actually only talking about parallelism and not talking about locality when we talk about parallelization with a small amount of synchronization.
