Title: Compiler Design Module 39.1 : Type Rules Revised for Reference Types
Video ID: n_V9oJ_wZMI
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

Now that we are introduced to reference types we are going to revise our typing rules to accommodate these reference types and the idea is very simple. Recall the addition rule which said the original rule said that if E1 is of type int, E2 is of type int, then E1 plus E2 is of type int. So this was the original addition rule that we had discussed earlier but now the revised addition rule would just generalize this to accommodate the subtyping relation for the reference type. It says if it is true that E1 is of type T1 and E2 is of type E2 and T1 is a subtype of int. So T1 could either be int or a subtype of int. Recall that int reference is a subtype of int or and T2 is a subtype of int then it is true that E1 plus E2 is of type int. Now there are two things to notice here. Number one is of course the generalization where we are allowing T1 to be either int or its subtype and the second thing here is that E1 plus E2 is necessarily the value type int not the reference type int and it's not any other subtype of int either. So what are the implications on what are the valid expressions that the language supports because of this typing rule? Well here if I declare a variable int x then x is of reference type int and because of this rule x plus 3 is a well typed expression. So x plus 3 is a well typed expression and so this is a type correct expression because x is of type int reference 3 is of type int and so int reference gets pattern matched with T1 int gets pattern matched with T2 and E1 plus E2 gets pattern matched is of type int and so this whole expression is of type int if we use the sequence rule and the scope rule after that. Now let's take another example I say x plus 3 colon equals 1. Now this is not well typed because x plus 3 is of type int by our typing rule because you know when you use addition operator you get an int type but what you require in the LHS of an assignment operator recall from the last module is an int reference type and so this is not a type correct expression based on our rules. So you can similarly generalize all our typing rules to accommodate reference types by just using subtyping relation recall that a reference type is a subtype of the corresponding value type and so you know if you just generalize it like this you basically can accommodate reference types as it is as though they were just value be if they're only the values being used in the expression. All right now let's go to another typing rule which is the typing rule for a loop the while construct in a language. So the while construct in a language looks like while some expression E and then some other expression x which forms the body of the while loop. So the idea being that if E is true then x is executed and after x has finished execution you again evaluate E and you keep doing this until E evaluates to false. If E never evaluates to false then this becomes an infinite loop. If E evaluates to false in the very first check then x is never executed and so the question is what is the type in our language? What type do we want to assign this expression y E x? All right so here is the typing rule which gives a type to this expression says if E is of some type TB, x is of type T and TB is a subtype of bool then it is true that y E x is of type y. Now notice that you know first of all I notice that E can be of type TB such that TB is a subtype of bools for example E can be of the bool reference type. This is a similar generalization that we saw on a previous slide. x can be of any arbitrary type T and this expression here is of type void. Recall that void is a supertype of all other types and there's no operation that is valid on a void type. This choice of using a void type for the whole while expression is interesting. One question that may arise in the mind is well if x is of type T, why not just give T as a type of the entire while loop? Well the answer is well you know recall that the intended semantics of the while loop are that if E did not execute even once then x is never executed. So if you know if the intention here was that you know the value returned by this loop is the value returned by the last execution of the body it is possible that the body never executed and in which case it would be incorrect to say that this whole expression has type T and so you know the choice that the language designer has made here which is us so the choice that we make as a language designer here is that we just give it a void type. So what does it mean? So for example let's consider this expression while x is not equal to 10 x colon equals x plus 1. Well this expression here will have the type void. Recall that this expression here will have the type int and this expression here will have the type bool but void cannot be used with the addition operator because there is no typing rule that basically allows me to add void to 1 and so this is not type correct and because of this plus 1 at the end. Okay now here's another rule for the address of operator which is the ampersand operator found commonly in C and C++. So if it is true that x is a reference type T ampersand then address of x or ampersand x in the programming language syntax is of type T star or the pointer type two star. So for example if x was a reference type int then ampersand x is of type this whole expression here would be of type int star but notice so this is type correct based on our address of rule in conjunction with the sequence rule and the scope rule but what about ampersand one well ampersand one does not fit into this type rule because one is of type int but not but what we require is that you know the operand of the ampersand operator the address of operator should be a reference type and one is not a reference type and so this is not type correct. All right now let's come to our next construct of our language which is the if then else operator. So you want to give a type to if e1 then e2 else e3. If it is true that e1 is of type Tb so that Tb is a subtype of bool and e2 is of type T2 and e3 is of type T3 then it is true that if e1 then e2 else e3 is of type void. Now once again this is a choice that the programming language designer has made just saying that you know this expression is of type void and not for example a type that is related to either T2 or T3 and once again the the implications of that is that whatever is the return value of this cannot be added to some other value for example or cannot be used with the logical and operator etc because nothing can be used with the void. So let's see what kind of expressions this typing rule admits and what it rejects. So if one less than two then four else true. Now this basically so four evaluates to int, true evaluates to bool, one is less than two evaluates to bool and this whole expression therefore evaluates to void and so far we have been able to type the whole expression and so indeed this expression is type correct. What about this expression if one is less than two then four else five plus one. Now this expression here based on our typing rules will be of type void and I cannot use the plus operator with the void type and so this is not type correct. Notice that our language allows the then expression and the else expression to have different types as seen in this example. All right so before I move on to my next construct I want to introduce I want to introduce this notion of the least upper bound of two types and before I do that I'll introduce upper bound and upper bound u represented by u equals ub upper bound of two types s and t. Let s and t be two arbitrary types then we say that u is an upper bound of s and t if the following holds so u is an upper bound of s and t if and only if s is a subtype of u and t is a subtype of u so both of these should hold okay so both of these should hold. All right so for example void is the upper bound of any two types t1 and t2 because t1 is always a subtype of void and t2 will always be a subtype of void because void recall by design is a super type of all other types in a language and so void is the upper bound of is an upper bound of any two types. Similarly int is an upper bound of int and int ampersand or int reference because int is a subtype of int reflexivity and int ampersand is also a subtype of int because every reference type is a subtype of its corresponding value type okay so now that we understand what's an upper bound so diagrammatically speaking you know if I kind of draw my subtyping relation the partial order as in a diagram then an upper bound basically represents so let's say this was s and this was t then you know the all common ancestors of both s and t represent the upper bounds of s and t and there could be multiple upper bounds for two types. There's a special upper bound called a least upper bound called which I'm calling l here which is lub of s comma t for two types s and t lub is such that l is an upper bound of s and t so it is a least it is a common ancestor of s and t and further for any other upper bound u2 of s comma t u2 should be a subtype of l sorry l is a subtype of u2 all right so it is the least such upper bound so it is the first common ancestor of s comma t so once again l is a least upper bound if it is an upper bound such that for any other upper bound l is a subtype of u2 okay so first of all what are some properties of least upper bound in general for any partially ordered set like the set of types in our language recall that you know our types are can be thought of as a set and the subtyping relation can be used to order that set because the subtyping relation is reflexive transitive and anti-symmetric this is also called a partially ordered set and in general the least upper bound for any two types need not be unique for a given partially ordered set even in the presence of a void type which is you know which is the great which is the which is an upper bound for all other types it's not necessary that lub is unique for any arbitrary lattice or for any arbitrary poset or partially ordered set but in our language the language that we are discussing as an example we are ensuring that it's always unique and and you know typically language designers will ensure that the typing I mean if they want to use the least upper bound operator in their typing rules then they will ensure that the least upper bound is always unique so we're going to use the lub operator in our typing rules as we see it's going to see in the next slide so let's see what is the lub of int and bool well int is not a subtype of bool neither is bool a subtype of int what is the only upper bound of int and bool that we know it's probably just void okay and that's the only upper bound of int and bool and so it's also the least upper bound of int and bool what about what about lub of int and int ampersand recall that int ampersand is a subtype of int and int is also a subtype of int so like there are two upper bounds of int and ampersand one of them is int and another one is so another upper bound of int and int ampersand is void which one is the least upper bound well because int is a subtype of void this is the least upper bound so the least upper bound of int and int ampersand is just int all right so now i come to my last construct in this module which is the ternary operator which is similar to the if-then-else operator but it has slightly different meaning so the syntax is e1 question mark e2 colon e3 this is similar to the ternary operator you'll find in c and c plus plus and the idea is you will check the value of e1 if it evaluates to true then you return e2 else you return e3 the difference between if-then-else and the ternary operator is that this actually returns a value that can be used for further computation as you're going to see in this typing rule as well so this rule is called the ternary operator and if it is true that e1 is of type tb such that tb is a subtype of bool and e2 is of type t2 and e3 is of type t3 then it's true that e1 question mark e2 colon e3 is of type least upper bound of t2 comma t3 and it's not just the least upper bound but the value you know the value type of the least upper bound of t2 comma t3 so recall that for the if-then-else operator the we were basically saying that it is a void type but for the ternary operator we are actually giving a more precise type a type that can be used in more operations so for example can i you know let's look at some examples to understand what these with this typing rule admits and rejects so is x question mark y colon z colon equals 10 a valid expression well y and z could be reference types but x question mark y colon z is definitely a value type because of because we are saying that the value type the value type will only be returned by this expression and we recall that the lhs of an expression of an assignment statement should always be a reference type and so this cannot be a well-typed expression ever all right let's take another example one if one is less than two question mark f5 colon four plus three so five is of type int four is of type int so this whole expression one is less than two is of type bool so this this pattern matches with tb and this whole expression is of type lub of int comma int which is just int and int plus three so three is also int so int plus int is well-typed and so this is a well-typed expression all right let's take another example one is less than two question mark five colon true now one is less than two is boolean so that matches with tv five is int true is bool and so int matches with t2 true matches with t3 and so the type of this expression would be val of lub of int comma bool which is just void and so this is also a well-typed expression because it you know our typing rules evaluate a type for it it's a type correct expression
