Title: Compiler Design Module 59 : Code Generation for Multiple Inheritance
Video ID: CC-tasLZjBE
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

So, last time we talked about how inheritance may be implemented so that we can still follow the object oriented principle which is that an object of a derived class can be used in place of an object of a base class and we looked at how the memory could be laid out and how dynamic dispatch could be implemented to do something like that. The trick there was that we basically lay out, we encapsulate the state of A and inside B, if A is the base class of B, such that A's state is laid out first and then B's state is laid out second. Similarly, in the virtual function table, V table, we lay out A's virtual functions before B's virtual functions and so the same code will work on, for A, would work on objects of class A and objects of class B. But consider this particular program where this scheme fails. So here is class A that has its own fields int x and a virtual function vA and it has a class B which has its own fields int y, virtual void vB. Notice that B is not a derived class of A, it's a completely independent class. But now class C is a class that derives from both A and B. So C inherits from both A and from B and it has some of its own fields and virtual functions, so z and vz. Now the problem is that now there are two base classes for the same derived class C and so we cannot use the same trick anymore, right? The reason we could use that trick was because there was a linear chain of base and derived classes, but now there is this branching and now either we have to put A first or we have to put B first and if we put A first then we can't use the same code that we use for objects of class B for objects of class C because now B is somewhere in the middle and so on. So let's see how one would implement something like this. So first of all, the scheme that we discussed in the previous module will not work now. Alright, so here is, let's try to deconstruct this. So here is one way to do it. You have three V tables in your object representation now. One is meant to be the V table for class A, objects of class A. Second is the V table for objects of class B and the third is the V table for objects of class C. And then you have, following the V table, you have the corresponding fields. So for example, A's fields, so X, B's fields, Y and C's fields, Z. Now this is all fine, we just laid out the object like this but with this we can see that it may not be possible to use the same object in the context of B and so on. So how are we going to manage that? So we're going to see that. The reason we won't be able to use B is because now B's V table is here. So this is B's V table. So this is what is B and this is what is A. And so if I pass this object in the context of A's code, then it would still work. It may still work. But if I pass this object in the context of B, it will not work because now the V table of B is actually at an offset from the pointer C and so on. So we have a problem. Also now this time I have decided to have a separate V table for C. So C, this is C but C without A and B, right? So anything that is not in A and B already, that is stored after A and B. So okay, now let's say this is my object layout. Once again, this is only one of the possibilities. There could be other possibilities as well. Now this object is also pointing to a V table. So let's look at the V table. So the V table for A, for example, would basically have the virtual function VA as you would expect, right? Because VA is function. And then it has type info. So because it's an object C of type C, so the type info or the type ID is C. And then it has the top offset, which is 0. Recall that the top offset is basically the offset from the pointers to the object, which is C, to the top of the object, right? So what does it mean? Right now just assume that it is 0, but we're going to see what it means very soon. Why is it meaningful? Very soon, all right? Now that's for A. Because we have laid out the object A first, it's easy to understand how things would work for A. They will just remain the same as the case for single inheritance. But now when I look at B, then this is how B's V table is going to look like. So now I'm going to replicate the fields top offset and type info for B again, because I want that this object should also be able to work in the context of B. And so what I'm going to do is I'm going to replicate some fields. In this case, I've replicated the top offset field and the type info field, except that the top offset field has a different value now. And we're going to discuss that soon. And then we basically have the virtual functions of B. In this case, that's VB. So what's the idea? The idea is that when I'm going to use this object in the context of B, then I'm going to use this particular pointer, right? So let me use a different color. I'm going to use this particular pointer. So if I want to use an object of type B, then I'm going to change the pointer. I'm going to adjust the pointer from C to B, all right? So this is also called pointer adjustment. And I need pointer adjustment because there's multiple inheritance. If there was just single inheritance, then I could have done without the need for pointer adjustment. But because there's multiple inheritance, I have to adjust the pointer for at least one of the base classes. And so I'm going to adjust the pointer. And now this part of this portion, this particular portion of the object, looks exactly like it's an object of type B. Also, this portion of the V table looks exactly like the V table for an object of type B, right? So if it was an object of just class B, then this is exactly what the structure would look like. And so if this pointer is initialized correctly, the B pointer is initialized correctly, then the same code should work nicely on an object of type C, just a matter of adjusting the pointer, okay? But that seems a little bit complicated. We're going to discuss that in a bit more detail. But also, what about C's own fields? So C's own field, so for one of the fields is Z here, which is part of the memory layout. But C's virtual functions can also live in the V table. And so we'll have more entries in the V table. So we can have, for example, the top offset, the type info, which is again replicated, and then the virtual functions of C, okay? So that's the idea. I'm going to replicate some stuff, and then I'm going to adjust the pointers depending on where it has been found. Now, before we do that, now let's look at what is the use of type info. Why do I need to replicate type info three times here? Well, the idea is very simple, because the same object can be used in different contexts. For example, if I'm using it in the context of A, then this is the type info that can get read because of a dynamic cast operator. If I'm using the same object in the context of B with pointer adjustment, this is where B is going to point. And so this is the type info that's going to get read, right? Because B's code is just going to say, look into the V table and look at the minus four offset of the V table. And from there, find what is the type ID of this object and to implement the dynamic cast operator. And that's where it's going to look. So we need to replicate it there as well. Moreover, if I do a type cast from dynamic cast from an object of type B to object of type C, I need to do a pointer readjustment. So just like from C to B, I had to kind of change the pointer from here to here. By the way, what do I mean by change the pointer? I just add an offset to the point, right? So for example, in this case, I will add an offset of eight to the pointer to get B. That would be pointer adjustment in the forward direction from C to B. If I want to adjust the pointer back from B to C, how do I do that? Well, it's not possible to do that without extra information. And that's what the top offset information is giving you. It's telling you what is the offset to the top of the object as of type C, because it's type info C. And so from here, if I want to get back to the pointer to object C, what is the offset that I should use? You know, because the derived class could have been some other derived class D, or maybe it could just have been an object of type B, in which case the top offset would have been zero. But in this case, in this example, the top offset would be minus eight because the object is of type C. And so the top of the object is an offset of minus eight from the object B that's been used in the context of B. And so that's what minus eight top offset means. And that's what the significance of top offset is that we have been usually setting to zero so far. All right. And finally, there is a V table for C. So if I want to basically access a virtual function of C, say VC, then I need to index through V table, the third V table, right? Now, you know, I'm just having this as a simple design. In reality, most operating, most compilers would basically still merge this V table of C with the V table of A. So that's just, you know, that would be a more efficient scheme because you save four bytes to store an extra V table pointer, and also the extra type info and all that. But just for simplicity and ease of explanation, I'm using three V tables here. I could have done with two V tables here as well. All right. So with a V table, now, once again, I have the type info and just in case, I want to know what is my top of the object from here, from this V table. So I'm using the convention that the top offset is the offset of the top of the object from the V table pointer. All right. And that's an easy, that's a convention that will make life easier for me when I'm looking at these kinds of structures later on. And so V table minus 16 is where the top of the object is in this particular case. All right. So that's the new structure in the presence of multiple inheritance. Notice that now I need to do pointer adjustment when I switch between contexts. So let's understand how we're going to switch between contexts. Let's say I write code like this. So I say A star A equals C. What will be the code generated for this? Well, the code generated for this would be actually not very different from the case of single inheritance. I'm just going to, you know, whatever is the pointer value for C, that's going to go to A. So this A will be equal to C, right? So the value of the pointer value for A and C would be same. And the code that was supposed to work for A would also work for this pointer because everything is laid out as though it is A because these are the first few fields of the A's memory layout. And this is the V table of A's memory layout, right? So everything works nicely for A. Now let's take a different case. Let's say I ask, what is the code that should be generated for B star B equals C? Now in this case, I want to convert an object, a pointer to the objects of class C to a pointer to an object of class B. And it's not just okay to use the same pointer. I need to do pointer adjustment as we just discussed. And so what I need to do is I'll need to add eight to the pointer C. And so what I'm going to get at the assembly level is that B would be equal to C plus eight, all right? And that's what pointer adjustment I'm going to do. And once I do B is equal to C plus eight, I'll get a pointer somewhere here. And this is where B is going to point. And now this whole thing looks like a B and it's V table also looks like a B, right? And there's a type info which can be used for dynamic cast and also the top offset which can also be used for dynamic cast, right? So if I, for example, want to dynamic cast back to C, then I'm going to first check whether it is actually a C object or not. I'm going to see yes, it is. And then I'm going to add the top offset to get back to my C object. All right, I should also point out that maybe these fields are redundant, right? So I have simplified things by using three V tables and maybe some of these fields like the top offset from the V table of C is redundant while I still need the top offset from B. So that's okay. All right, finally, okay. Then we have C.VA, right? So how do I implement C.VA? So C in this case, the compiler knows that C is an object of class C. So it can just, you know, decide that, okay, I know where is VA living in C's structure, in C's memory layout. So where is VA living? I know that VA lives at an offset from the first V table. Because I'm in the context of C, I know that there are three V tables and I also know that VA lives at an offset from the first V table, at an offset zero from the first V table. So I'm just going to dereference the first V table and dereference the first zero, zeroth offset there and I'm going to get the value of VA. All right, similarly, how do I implement C.VC? Now in this case, once again, because it's in the context of C, the code would know that look, VC is actually at zero offset from the third V table. So it's going to actually index through the third V table and at offset zero, it's going to find VC. All right, okay. But then how do I implement C.VB? Okay, that's also easy. Now this time I'm going to know that it's actually, it's again in the context of C. So the code should know that it's a context of C. In the context of C, VB lives at an offset from the second V table. So I'm going to go through the second V table and at an offset zero, I should expect to find the pointer to VB. Okay, now how about this code? If I say B star B equals C, so I first convert C to a B and then I call B.VB. Okay, so now this VB is being called in the context of B and not in the context of C. So first of all, when I use B star B equals C, what I'm going to get is I'm going to get a pointer B that is at an offset. So I'm going to have pointer adjustments to get B at an offset of eight from C. And then I'm going to call B.VB. So inside, now this is being called in the context of B. So I'm going to just look at the only V table that B is supposed to have, which is this one. And then I'm going to look at an offset zero from this V table, which is going to be this particular value. And then I can call it. So, so far so good. This should work nicely. Okay, so fine. But now here is another complication. What if VB has been overridden by class C? So that's our next case. So what if class C also defines a virtual function VB in addition to its own virtual function VC, and it's the overridden version. So let me just write overwrite here, right? So VB has been overridden by C, all right? Now, if I call B.VB, things should still work, except that now inside the V table. So once again, this would be where B is pointing. And so from the V table, I'm going to go, and I'm going to look at the zeroth offset. And this case, instead of the B's VB, I should have a pointer to C's VB. That's what dynamic dispatch means, because it's the overridden version of the function. But will it work? Now the problem here is that C's VB is going to expect an object of type C. So for example, C's VB can basically have a reference to this pointer, right? So for example, it could call, it could say this dot something, right? And C++, this is supposed to be the pointer to the current object. And the code of VB is, C's VB can potentially access C's virtual functions or C's fields. For example, C's VB is perfectly okay to say this dot Z, all right, inside C's VB. And that should be legal code. After all, that's what it's supposed to do. I mean, it's in the context of C. So whatever is available in C should be accessible through VB. How do I implement that? All right. So it's actually not an issue because I could have just said that in the case of single inheritance, I could have just treated this B pointer as C pointer and things would have worked. And I could have just looked at it and the context of C. But now I cannot do that because the C pointer is actually at an offset, small c. So that's an offset of minus eight from B, right? So before I call VB, I need to do pointer readjustment back to C so that this pointer available to VB is the correct one, right? Because this dot Z, the code for this dot Z inside VB is going to do what? It's going to add, you know, four, eight, six, 12, 16, 20. So it's going to add 20 to whatever is the pointer supplied as this, right? So if I say this dot Z, it's going to dereference a value at offset 20 to get the value of Z. But if I call B dot VB, then the value of this that's being passed would be this value. And an offset 20 from this value would be some jump. It won't be Z. So what do I need to do before I actually transfer control to VB? I need to adjust the pointer B back to C, right? So this is, no, this is during dynamic dispatch. Only if the function has been overridden, I need to readjust the pointer back from B to C. If the function has not been overridden, then I don't need to do this, all right? And so the compiler needs to worry about that. And how will the compiler do something like this? Well, the answer is the following. It's going to not have a direct call to C, jump to C, V colon, colon VB, because that would be wrong, because this pointer would be wrong. Instead, it's going to have a pointer. It's going to have a thunk. What's a thunk? It's basically a small number of instructions that can be executed before calling a function, all right? And this thunk is going to look like the following. It's going to add minus eight to the this pointer. So let's say that this pointer is somehow living in the stack pointer register, or it could be any other register. I'm just using stack pointer here. So it's just going to add minus eight to that stack pointer register. And so that's going to be the adjustment to the this pointer. And once again, assuming in the calling conventions that the stack pointer has this pointer, if this is confusing you, I can also change this to, let's say, something like A0 or A1 or whatever, right? Whatever is the register or the memory location that's supposed to hold this pointer at the entry of VB, that location currently has this pointer in it, and it has B in it, right? Because that's what B.VB is supposed to do. But in general, if VB wasn't overridden, then this would have been fine, but because VB has been overridden, before I call the overridden value, I need to readjust my pointer. So I need to add minus eight to B, and then branch to C's VB, all right? And so this is what the compiler should do. It should not point the VB to C's VB directly, but it should add some extra code that's going to readjust the pointer before actually calling C's VB, okay? Now, also this creates another problem, because if let's say I call C.VB, all right? So what if I call C.VB now in the overridden, in this scenario where VB has been overridden? Now, in this case, C.VB would basically be called in the context of C, so the pointer would already be the right pointer, the top pointer, C. And if I just look at the V table and look at the zeroth offset, then this is what I get. But here, I'm unnecessarily doing a readjustment. Here, I didn't need a readjustment, because I already have. So for C.VB, I don't need a readjustment, while for B.VB, I need a readjustment. So to handle this, if there's an overridden function, what the compiler would need to do is need to have another pointer, which is just pointing to C.VB, and for VB called in context of C, it should go through C's V table, and in this case, an offset of four, and look at C's VB, all right? Okay, this is how you will implement multiple inheritance. You will generate code for multiple inheritance.
