Title: Compiler Design Module 134 : Self Reuse
Video ID: 9KMZvgDdV5Y
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

So last time we discussed how we characterize reuse, data reuse and we basically had different categorizations like self reuse, group reuse, temporal, spatial and so on and in this module we are going to focus on one particular category of reuse which is self reuse. So here is an example to motivate the discussion. For i equals 0, i is less than n, i plus plus, a 0 equals 0. Now it's clear that across all the n iterations of this loop, it's the same element that's getting accessed which is a 0 and so there is self reuse and you know you can say it's self temporal reuse but I'm not going to use the word temporal, that's the implied word, self reuse just means self temporal reuse, okay. So there's a lot of self reuse. Now if I look at the array access coefficient matrix, capital F, that's just 0 because it's a one dimensional array so that means that the number of rows of the coefficient matrix is 1, moreover the dimension is basically always constant 0 and so the coefficient of the loop iteration index i is just 0 and small f is also 0 because that's the constant term which in this case also happens to be 0, alright. So I want to establish some kind of relationship between capital F, small f and reuse, self reuse and we're going to do this by looking at some examples. So in this particular example we see that the coefficient matrix is 0, the constant matrix small f is also 0 and there is self reuse, okay. Let's move on to our another example and this time I just replace a 0 equals 0 with a i equals 0 and now my coefficient matrix is 1 because and this constant matrix is 0 because the array access is 1 into i plus 0 that's just i and that's exactly what my array access address can be specified as for a unidimensional memory access, okay. So a i equals 0, in this case there is no self reuse, alright, so there is no self temporal reuse because in every iteration it's a different element that's being accessed, alright. Now let's take another example, this time I have the same body a i equals 0 but I have a two dimensional loop nest, for i equals 0 to n, for j equals 0 to m and this time you know my loop iteration indices are i j, it's a two dimensional loop nest so it's a two dimensional set of indices that's going to specify my iteration space and consequently this is my coefficient matrix, it has only one row because the array access is unidimensional and so capital F has the coefficients 1 and 0 because the coefficient of i is 1 and the coefficient of j is 0 in i and the small f is also 0 and in this case we say that there is self reuse because for across all iterations of j it's the same location a i that's getting accessed, the location doesn't change across iterations of the inner loop, it does change with across iterations of the outer loop but there is significant reuse because same location is being accessed across multiple points in the iteration space for the same value of i, different values of j. Here's another example let's say it's a two dimensional array access and it's i, 2i so a i, 2i equals 0, once again my iteration space is represented using a two dimensional vector i j and this is my coefficient matrix 1, 0, 2, 0 because in both the dimensions of the array access i and 2i j is absent so the coefficient of j in both the dimensions is 0, the coefficient of i in the first dimension is i and is 1 and the coefficient of i in the second dimension is 2 and the constant term is 0 and in this case there is self reuse. Why is there self reuse because for example just consider the case just you know once again you know for different iterations of j for the inner loop it's the same locations for example if i equals 0 then it's a 0, 0 that's being accessed across all the iterations of the inner loop, if i equals 1 then it's a 1, 2 that's being accessed across all the iterations of the inner loop and so on and so there is self reuse. Now we want to develop a relationship between capital F and self reuse and I'm going to you know come to that very soon but I hope you are noticing some kind of a pattern here. Here is an example, here is another example, it's the same two dimensional loop nest but the array access, a two dimensional array access is given by i, 2i plus j. Now the coefficient matrix, now the loop iteration index vector is again i j, the coefficient matrix is 1 0 2 1 because in the first dimension the coefficients are 1 and 0 for i and j respectively and for the second dimension the coefficients are 2 and 1 for i and j respectively and the constant term is still 0 0. In this particular case there is no self reuse because across different iterations of j it's a different value or different address of the array that's being accessed for example 0, 0 is going to access 0, 0 plus 0 so 0, 0 i, j equals 0, 0 access 0, 0 of the array, 0, 1 access is 0, 1 in the array and so on right. So for different values of either i or j these are different values that are being accessed. Notice the coefficient vector, the coefficient matrix capital F 1 0 2 1 now let me change that a little bit and let's say I just change my coefficient matrix so that it becomes i plus j comma 2i plus 2j. Once again I have a two dimensional loop nest i j and I have an array access, first dimension is i plus j, the second dimension is 2i plus 2j and now this is my coefficient matrix 1 1 2 2 right for each of the dimensions. For the first dimension the coefficients of both i and j is 1, for the second dimension the coefficients of both i and j are 2 and that's exactly being represented with my coefficient matrix. Now I claim that in this particular example there is self reuse okay, why is there self reuse because well it's true that for a given value of i, for different values of j I will be accessing different array elements because let's say i equals 0 then j equals 1 is going to access a 1 comma 2, j equals 2 is going to access a 2 comma 4 and so on right. But let's look at for example point a 10 comma 20, now a 10 comma 20 will be accessed for what vectors i comma j, well I claim that whenever i plus j equals 10 then a 10 comma 20 is going to access because when i plus j is 10 then the first dimension is going to become 10 and the second dimension is going to become 20 okay and so what are some solutions to i plus j equals 10, well 1 comma 9, 0 comma 10, 1 comma 9, 2 comma 8, 3 comma 7, 4 comma 6, 5 comma 5 and so on right. So there is there's order n number of different indices so things like 0 comma 10, 1 comma 9, dot dot dot, 5 comma 5 and so on right. So there are many different points in the iteration space for which the same location a 10 comma 20 will get accessed and so in this case also there is self-reuse right, recall what is the definition of self-reuse, if multiple points in the iteration space access the same array location for a given statement in this case the statement is a i plus j comma 2 i plus 2 j equals 0 then there is self-reuse and that is actually holding true here because for point 0 comma 10 and 5 comma 5 it's the same location 10 comma 20 that would get accessed okay and so notice that this has something to do with a characteristic of the capital F matrix. So what how do I know whether they're self-reuse or not, well if the data referenced by a static access has k dimensions so in other words what's the dimensionality of the data that is being accessed now that doesn't really mean you know what the dimensionality of the array being accessed for example in the array that we discussed earlier we discussed both one dimensional and two dimensional arrays and in both cases there were cases for in one dimensional array where there was reuse and there were cases in a one dimensional array where there was no reuse similarly in there were cases in a two dimensional array where there was no reuse and there were cases in a two dimensional array where they were used. So the dimension of access is not the dimension of the array. The dimension of the access is basically the dimension of the, the kind of space, the dimension of the space of the array access. So if the array is accessing multiple points, if I draw the dimension of, if I draw, if I, if I basically characterize that as a vector space, then what is the dimension of that vector space? Okay? And so for example in the previous example, i plus j, 2i plus 2j is going to give me a one dimensional space because it's going to be always, if I know one dimension, the other dimension just follows from that dimension because the moment I know i plus j, 2i plus, the second dimension of the array access will always be double of the first dimension. So if it, if the first dimension is 10, the second dimension will be 20 irrespective of what is the value of i and j. Similarly, if the first dimension is 100, then the second dimension will be 200 and so on. And so even though this array is a two dimensional array, the dimensionality of the access is one dimensional because one dimension, if you fix one dimension, the other dimension follows from the first dimension in this particular case. And so if the data referenced by a static access has k dimensions, in my previous example because it had one dimension and the access is nested in a D depth loop where D is greater than k and that was the case in my previous example, the loopness depth was 2 and the access, the dimension of the array access was 1 and so 2 was greater than 1, then the same data can be reused n to the power D minus k times, right? So in other words, in my previous example, the same data would be reused n to the power 2 minus 1 or order n times. So if each of the loop in iteration indices have order n elements in them, then the same location would have a reuse of order n by substituting 2 for D and 1 for k. N is the number of iterations of one loop, average number of iterations of one loop, we are of course approximating here, assuming that these values of the upper bounds and lower bounds are very large, which they typically are because we are basically dealing with large arrays and so and they are similar across dimensions, we are hoping. If they are not, we can just take the average but you know, under those approximations, the amount of reuse there will be, would be n to the power D minus k, where k is the dimensionality of the access and D is the dimensionality of the loop nest or the iteration space. So what do I mean by dimensionality of a reference? I have just explained it very informally using an example where I say, you know, if you fix these many number of dimensions, the other dimensions follow from that. What is the more formal way of saying that? And that is basically nothing but the rank of the coefficient matrix, okay? This is exactly what we, you know, this is very well studied in the linear algebra theory and the dimensionality of a reference can be given by the rank of the coefficient matrix capital F, okay? And we can go back to all the examples that we have seen before and see that in all the cases where there was reuse, the rank of the coefficient matrix, which represents the dimensionality of the access, was less than the dimensionality of the loop iteration space or the loop nest depth, okay? So if this is k and that was D, then k was less than D. If k is less than D, then there is reuse. If k is not less than D, then there is no reuse and so that's, by the way, k would be less than equal to D because after all, you cannot have an array access of dimensionality greater than the dimensionality of the loop nest depth itself because you are actually constrained by how many different points traverse in the loop nest in the first place, okay? So this, it is also easy to see this using some algebraic simplifications. So we want to find, to identify whether there is self-reuse or not, we want to identify two iterations i and i prime where fi plus f equals fi prime plus f, right? Because fi and capital F and small f basically represent the the mapping from loop iteration space to the array access space and we are interested in finding out what are the two iteration indices for which they access the same location. In other words, capital Fi plus small f should be equal to capital Fi prime plus small f, right? Notice that it's the same capital F's and small f's on both sides. The only difference is the iteration index vector i, okay? So this simplifies to capital F of in capital F multiplied with i minus i prime equals zero and we are interested in finding what is the number of points in i and i prime that basically satisfy this equation. Now it's, you know, from linear algebra we know that if capital F is a full rank matrix, then there is only one solution to this equation which is i equals i prime, right? Because if this multiplicand here is zero, then for any matrix capital F this would evaluate to zero but that basically means i equals i prime which means it's the same iteration and then there is reuse but we are really not interested in i equals i prime, right? So we are, so the trivial solution here is i equals i prime but that is not the interesting solution for us. So one of the constraints we want to add to this system of equations to identify whether there is self-reuse or not is that i should be not equal to i prime. Now if F is a full rank matrix, then there is no non-trivial solution to this equation. In other words, you know, for example in a one-dimensional case if capital F was just a multiplier, let's say two, so two into x equals zero, so the only solution to that is x equals zero, right? But and there is no other solution and so two can be thought of in the scalar world as a non-zero kind of multiplier. In a vector world, in a matrix world, we say that if F is full rank, then the only solution to F into x equals zero is when x equals zero but we are not interested in that solution but if F is not full rank, in other words, the rank of F is smaller than the total dimension of the matrix, then we have other non-zero solutions and this space of non-zero solutions is called the null space of F. Once again, I am just borrowing these terms from well-studied theory in linear algebra. If you are unaware, if you are not familiar with these terms, I will point you to some material on linear algebra in the comment section. Okay, so for example, we just try to characterize the null space of different matrices. So if my matrix is 1 0 0 1, firstly, what do I mean by rank of a matrix? The rank of a matrix is basically the number of linearly independent rows or columns in that matrix. So you know, just without loss of generality, let me talk about rows. So number of rows which are linearly independent which means none of these rows can be written as linear combination of all the other rows. In this case, when I say 1 0 0 1, this is also the identity matrix, the number of linearly independent rows for this capital F is 2 because the second row cannot be written as a linear combination of the first row and so the null space for this particular matrix F is actually just a single point 0 comma 0 or the 0 vector because it's a full rank matrix. The dimensions of the matrix are 2 cross 2 and the rank of the matrix is also 2 and so it's a full rank matrix and so the only solution to the equation Fx equals 0 is x equals 0 and so that's the only null space. Let's take another example, F equals 1 minus 1 2 minus 2. Now in this case, the rank of the matrix is actually 1 because the second row can be written as a linear combination of the first row. If I just multiply the first row by 2, I get the second row. So the number of linearly independent rows in F is only 1 and so the rank of the matrix is 1 and consequently and equivalently, the null space of this matrix is not just a trivial solution but it has actually order n solutions or where n is the dimension, the number of points in a single dimension. So in this case, the null space is actually 0. So whenever i equals j, this matrix would be, so whenever i equals j, then in other words, if I multiply this with i comma j, so whenever i equals j, then F into this ij vector is going to give me 0. So for example, if I multiply F with 1 1, it's going to give me 0. If I multiply by 2 2, it's going to give me 0 and so on. And so the null space is not just trivial but it has i minus j equals 0. So there are many points in the null space 1 1 2 2 3 3 4 4 and so on. For this two-dimensional space, the number of points in the null space is order n and so the amount of reuse that we have for such a coefficient matrix is also order n. So in the first example, it has no self-reuse because the null space minus the trivial solution is empty. But the second case, it has self-reuse because the null space minus the trivial solution is non-empty.
