Title: Compiler Design Module 171 : Undefined Values
Video ID: LbQ6OvehOao
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

So we've been looking at the design of an IR with respect to undefined behavior or non-determinism. Notice that an IR like LLVM actually needs to cater to multiple languages because the way we typically design our compilation pipelines is that multiple source languages lower down to the same IR, and then you do optimizations on the IR. Many languages, different languages may have different semantics. So C is one of the most aggressive languages in terms of the non-deterministic semantics. So let's take an example. Let's say this variable called X is uninitialized and then I try to print X. Now a language like C says that if you try to access an uninitialized value such as you try to print it, then that's undefined behavior. So it is perfectly okay to say that X is poison, or you just say that reading X is going to trigger undefined behavior. But many languages would just say that you expect a random value to be printed. It should not be that the program is treated as uninitialized or undefined. The program is not really going to exhibit UB, but what you expect in the language semantics is that a random value is printed. Now notice that printing of a random value is very different from triggering undefined behavior. Triggering undefined behavior means anything can happen. Whereas printing a random value just gives a very small set of possible behaviors, which is let's say if int was 32 bit, then maybe two to the power 32 different behavior, then that's it. Whereas undefined behavior expands that set of non-determinism to a much larger degree. In other words, there are more deterministic languages that allow lesser degree of non-determinism, and here is an example which involves printing of an uninitialized value. Here are some more examples. So let's say I have an uninitialized value and say Y equals X multiplied with zero. Now, once again, a language like C would just say this is undefined behavior. But in other language, X is supposed to be just some random integer which has not been initialized. In fact, some languages may even go to the extent that any newly allocated variable must be assumed to have the initial value of zero or some fixed constant. That typically adds more burden on the runtime and the compiler, because you have to emit an extra instruction to zero out that particular variable. So a more performant alternative is that you say that reading an uninitialized value can return a random value, and that's what I'm trying to show in this example. C takes the other extreme, which says that reading an uninitialized value is just undefined behavior. So that basically means anything can happen. In any case, this particular language, which is more conservative than C, one may say that reading X is basically going to return a random bit string, in which case multiplication of a random bit string with zero should yield zero. Similarly, if I say X minus X, then maybe that should yield zero for some other language. Similarly, X divided by X may should probably yield one, assuming X is not zero or something like that. Maybe this particular example is not so good, so I'll just remove it. But when I print YZW, maybe I expect, let's get rid of the one, maybe I expect zero, zero. Depends on the language semantics, and the IR needs to support such semantics. An LLVM IR, because it is the middle end for many languages, it needs to support such behavior, such semantics. Today, I'm going to tackle this first issue, which is if I take an initialized value and multiply it by zero, I expect a zero value to be printed out. For the other things, for example, subtracting X from itself, should it yield a zero value or not? I'm not going to talk about that today. Because different languages may have different options here. They may say, X minus X can potentially, different reads of the same initialized value, X may give you different valuations, and so on. And why such semantics are used, will also become clear in this particular module. But I want to point out again that I'm only going to tackle this particular semantics, which is you use X in some arithmetic operation, and based on that, you expect the value returned to be some value. So in this example, if you multiply it with zero, you should get zero. And these things where you read the same initialized value twice or more than once, then what happens, I'm not going to discuss. I mean, that issue, expecting Z to be zero is asking for too much for the kind of thing that I'm going to discuss today. I'm going to discuss the other thing, which is if you do X minus X, you should expect zero later on in my discussion on IR semantics. So let's look at this particular example, int X, Y equals X star zero. The first thing I want to point out is that the Poisson value is insufficient. If I say that an uninitialized variable basically is initialized to the Poisson value, which represents the error value that should never be used, then if I say Poisson star zero, then that's just going to give me Poisson into Y. But that's not what I expect in my language semantics, this new language that I have defined. What I expect is that if I print Y, you should get zero, not some error value or not some undefined behavior or anything like that. And so if the uninitialized X is assumed to be the Poisson value, then Y will also get the Poisson value. And so the Poisson value is insufficient for the kind of behavior I'm expecting, which is that Y should get zero in this example. So what is the solution? The solution is that we want to introduce a new value that has less non-determinism than the Poisson value. And this value I'm going to call the undefined value. Just like we have undefined behavior, this value, this is undefined value. Undefined behavior and undefined value are two very different things. Undefined behavior is a characteristic of the program. Undefined value is a characteristic of a particular variable in the program. And so undefined behavior means the program can now do anything. Undefined value basically means that this particular variable can have any value. We don't know what it is, but it could take any value that is permissible under the type of that particular variable. So that's what I'm going to call the undefined value. And I'm going to use the undef short form for the undefined value. I'm also going to call it undef for short. So let's see how undef is going to help us out in the example that we wanted. So if I say int X, then I'm going to assume that any uninitialized value is an undefined value, which basically means that that particular uninitialized value can potentially have any bit string that is representative of the integer type. And then if I say Y equals X plus one, then again, I'm going to get an undefined value into Y because if X could have been any bit string, then plus one of that is also going to have any bit string. And so by any bit string, I mean if int was a 32-bit representation, then two to the power 32 different values. So if X could take any of the two to the power 32 different values, then in this case, Y can also take any of the two to the power 32 different values. And so an undef represents an unspecified bit pattern. However, if I have, let's say Z equals X star zero, then I can say Z equals zero because you take any bit pattern and you multiply it with zero, you're going to get zero. And so these operators are going to obey that kind of semantics. In other words, an undef value is basically representing an unknown value which can take any of the two to the power 32 different concrete deterministic values that the type allows. All right. So let's look at some examples of undefined value and how they behave in terms of their operational semantics. So if I add any variable B to an undef, it is okay to say A equals undef. Because undef can be any bit variable, irrespective of what value B has, I can always choose a value for undef such that I get any particular value. So if I say, I want to put A to 10 and let's say B was three, then I can choose this undef to be seven, right? So if I wanted this undef to be 10, then I can choose this undef to be seven. And in other words, any value that I want for A, I can choose some value for undef here such that these two programs are equivalent. And because the two programs have equivalent behaviors, it's okay to transform A equals B plus undef into A equals undef. You know, other examples, just like I do B plus undef, I could have done B minus undef and it would have been okay to convert this to A equals undef. If I did B XOR undef, let's say, which is the logical XOR operator, bitwise XOR, then even then it is okay to convert B XOR undef to undef because once again, no matter what value I expect A to take, I would always be able to find some value of this undef that gives me that value of A in the final scheme of things. Similarly, if I, let's say, do the comparison relational operator, say I'd say B is less than undef, it's okay to convert this into A equals, you know, a single bit variable, which is I one of undef because I can, you know, give me any B and I can choose undef such that undef could be either bigger than B or smaller than B. And so I can get either true or false or either zero or one. And so A can, this kind of expression can be simplified to A equals I one undef. So these are, you know, we define undef in a certain way, which basically means that undef represents the case where this variable can take any of the allowable values that that particular type supports. So for an I 32, that would be two to the power 32. For an I one, that would be two, zero and one. For I two, it will be four and so on. And then basically based on that meaning of the undef variable, I'm basically defining, you know, what are the legal transformations. So for example, B is less than undef because undef could have taken any value. It's okay to change this to B, A equals undef. In this case, A equals I one undef because A is basically a Boolean value variable. Now let's take some other examples which are not so easy from a transformation perspective. Let's say I say or I 32 B undef. In my previous slide, I had the example of XOR, but this time I have a different example and say or instead of XOR. Now notice that depending on the value of B, the result of the set of values that A can take is now restrictive. For example, if B was all ones, so, you know, a 32 bit value, which has all 32 bit bit string, a 32 bit bit vector, which has all ones, then all of, you know, all ones with undef would only give me a single value, which is all ones. Similarly, if, you know, B was something which only the least significant bit was one and everything else was zero, then or of B with undef will give me a set, you know, can give me a set of values which has one in the least significant bit. It can never have a zero in the least significant bit. And so even there, it's not okay to just say that A is undef because undef basically means that all the possible values are possible. Like two to the, if it's an I 32 type, then all the possible two to the power 32 values are possible. You know, for some values of B, like the examples that I just used, only some of the values of the set of two to the power 32 are possible. You know, if for example, the least significant bit of B was one, then only those values are possible in A for which the least significant bit is also one. And so it is not okay to transform or of B comma undef to undef. All right, so it's not okay to say A equals or, it's not okay to do this transformation because the source had lower non-determinism. For example, if, you know, let me just make this concrete. Let's say this was one, right? So this B was one. So if B was one, then basically the set of values that A could have in the original program was basically two to the power 31 because the least significant bit is being constrained to be one. Everything else can be anything else, but you know, the least significant bit is constrained to be one. In other words, this statement says that A can only hold an odd value. It can never hold an even value. Whereas this statement says A can hold any value because it could be either an odd or an even value. And now I'm going from lower non-determinism because the set of values that A could hold in the original program were smaller, it's two to the power 31, to higher non-determinism because here it's two to the power 32. And this is not legal. You can't go from lower non-determinism to higher non-determinism. And so this kind of transformation is illegal for the undef value. And so once again, I'm trying to define the operational semantics of the undef value and these examples are telling us something about what we are expecting the results to be. On the other hand, it is okay to say that, you know, or I-32, it's okay to simplify or I-32 B, undef to A equals B. Whatever I take B to be, I can always choose undef to be all zeros. And if I choose undef to be all zeros, then or of I-32 B, all zeros is just B. So in this case, I'm going from higher non-determinism, higher non-determinism because undef could have taken any of the two to the power 32 values to lower non-determinism because I forced the undef to take one particular value that is all zeros. And so I can always, you know, as a compiler, I can always go from higher non-determinism to lower non-determinism, but not the other way around. This is also called refinement. I can always refine the behaviors of the program. I can always cut the behaviors of the program. I can always reduce the behaviors of the program, but I can never increase the behaviors of the program because if you increase the behaviors of the program, you're basically saying that, you know, the new program is not really, you know, working under this envelope of the original program. It's actually going outside the envelope. And that's not something that a compiler can do legally. Similarly, just like I used the example of or, here's an example of and, which behaves, you know, similarly, I can convert and i32 b, undeaf to b, but I cannot convert and i32 b, undeaf to undeaf. Just again, because if b was all zeros, for example, or the last significant bit of b was zero, then, you know, the original program has less non-determinism, but the new program would have more non-determinism and that's not acceptable. Here's another example. Let's say I just said a equals undeaf. It's always okay to change it to some constant. I'm just using minus 42 as an example, but you can always change it to some arbitrary constant because you're going from high non-determinism to lower non-determinism. But you can't, for example, change multiplication of four into undeaf to undeaf because once again, four into undeaf is going to return a value that, you know, a set of values that are multiples of four, whereas undeaf basically means it can be any number irrespective of whether it is a multiple of four or not. And so I cannot go from this direction to this direction, although it is okay to go in the other direction, as I'm going to show in the previous slide. Subsequent slides. Now let's look at this example. Let's say a equals undeaf and say b equals multiply of a by two. So this is basically saying b equals a star two and a is in I-32 type. And then c equals a and three, right? And we already seen that a star two can be changed to two even if, because a is just undeaf. So that's just, you know, I can just choose any value for a, so I can just change a star two which is just undeaf star two to two. This is something that we've already seen. I mean, I can just choose, for example, the value one for the undeaf value. And then that's just one star two, that's going to be two. Similarly, I can say and of a comma three gives me three. In this case, I'm choosing the value all ones for a or something like that. Or I can even choose the value three for a and that would also give me and of three comma three. And that's going to be three. But notice that this such transformations, now I transformed both b and c and simplified them, but such transformation required different valuations of a at different program points. At here, when I was doing this, the valuation of a was one. Whereas here, the valuation of a was let's say three. And so at different program points, I use different valuations of a. It's not even necessary that, you know, I basically have the same valuation of a all through the program. It's not necessary that I fix a particular valuation, let's say one or three or five or anything like that. It's basically means that, you know, if it's an undef value, then every time it is read, it can basically give me a different value. And so that is basically the difference between, you know, x star zero and x minus x, the something that we had in our initial slide. I'm going to talk more about that soon. So here's a new interesting fact about the undef value that that's part of the LLVM IR, for example. Each time an undefined value is observed, in this case, a was an undefined value, it can return a different bit pattern, right? So for example, if I do XOR I32 undef, undef, then it's not necessary that at the end of it, I get, you know, a equals zero, right? Because this undef can return a different value and that undef can return a different value. In fact, I can make this even more interesting. I can say b equals undef, I said a equals XOR b, b. Once again, I cannot say that a can be not equal to zero is a valid possible behavior. Because each time b was observed, I was basically observing an undef value. And each time an undef value is observed, I can basically get a different valuation. And so it's not necessary that XOR of undef, undef basically yields zero, it can be an arbitrary value. In fact, you know, XOR of undef, undef, I can choose the two undef such that any new value can be generated. So it's okay to simplify, for example, XOR of undef, undef to undef, you know, but not to zero. All right, now let's take another example. So say a equals undef and say b equals a plus a. And then I say c equals b mod two. It's not necessary that b was even and it's not necessary that c equals zero because once again, each time a is observed, I could get a different value. I could have a different valuation. And these semantics for allowing different valuations of the undef value at different observation points, basically, the motivation for this is basically what I used in the previous slide because for different program points, I may choose to use different values of the undef value and because that gives me better optimization opportunity. And so that's what, you know, we use and because of that, we, you know, some of the things that we would have imagined to be obvious, obvious theorems that, you know, a plus a should always yield an even number now no longer hold true. Here's another example. In this case, I have a equals undef and I say, instead of saying k plus a, I said two star a. Now in this example, a is observed only once and irrespective of what that value is used, what value is used for that particular valuation, twice of that, a two into that is going to give me an even value. And this time, if I say c equals b mod two, I'm okay because this time b is going to be an even number. So the difference between this example and this example is here a is being observed twice and each time it's observed, it can return a different bit pattern. Here a is being observed only once and so it returns only one bit pattern and you multiply it by two and you get an even number. All right, here are some, you know, if I look at the original example that I use, let's say y equals x star zero and z equals x minus x. So x star zero would still give me zero if x was undef but x minus x can give me any random bit string because once again, I'm observing x twice and so I could get any random bit string. In fact, x by x can give me potentially undefined behavior because it will be divided by zero. So this could even be undefined behavior. All right, so my last example, I cannot, for example, change two into undef to undef plus undef because two into undef returns only even values whereas undef plus undef returns both odd and even values because in this case, undef is being observed twice. Whereas I can always go back, I can always convert undef plus undef into two into undef because in this direction I am, in this direction, I am reducing non-determinism and in the downward direction, I am increasing non-determinism. And a compiler can always go in the reduction direction or the refinement direction but never in the other direction.
