Title: Compiler Design Module 165 : Blocking for Fully Permutable Loops
Video ID: P9Go3Eb_3kw
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

So now we're going to talk about our next topic, which is blocking in affine programs in the polyhedral framework. So let's consider this program, which is for i equals zero to n, for j equals zero to n, some statement s. And the statement s could have accesses to data elements that involve i and j as indices. And depending on what the statement s is, there'll be some data dependencies between different iteration points in this polyhedral space, defined by the two-dimensional polyhedron of i in one dimension and j in the other dimension. In this graph here, I'm drawing the iteration space, i being the y-axis and j being the x-axis. And this is a two-dimensional polyhedron. Let's say this is, because it's going from for i equals zero to n and j equals zero to n, there's actually a square polyhedron. And there are all these iteration points which are marked as blue crosses. This time, the edges that I'm drawing are not the data-dependence edges. The data-dependence edges are kind of unknown right now because we don't know what s is. S is supposed to be a placeholder for any statement. So these yellow edges here are not the data-dependence edges, but they are the execution order edges, all right? So first, for example, zero comma zero will execute, then zero comma one will execute, then zero comma two will execute when I'm basically using i comma j as the way to basically represent the iteration point. So zero comma two means i equals zero and j equals two. Zero comma three, zero comma four, zero comma five. And when I reach the end of one axis, then I, let's say, you know, reach, let's say n was six, then I've reached the end at j equals five. Then I go to one comma zero and then one comma one, one comma two, one comma three. In fact, we have discussed this before. This execution order is identical to the ascending lexicographic order of the two loop indices i comma j. All right, so now we know that, so this is the execution order. And what is blocking going to do for us? Blocking is going to change the execution order, all right? And let's for now assume that when we do blocking, we are basically preserving the data dependencies and that's going to be a requirement. But for now, let's just assume that, you know, s is completely data independent or something like that. And if it is, then we can do the following. We can basically change this loop nest which we had depth two to a loop nest of depth four. And in this loop nest, we have, we still have, you know, the outer loops iterating from zero to n. But the big change here is that instead of incrementing by one, now I'm going to increment by a blocking factor b. Similarly, when I kind of iterate on j, I'm going to increment by b. And so I'm going to call them i, i and j, j just to distinguish them from i and j, which I'm going to use in the inner loop. So basically the outer loops are going to hop at, you know, at an interval of b. And so they're going to first consider, for example, zero comma zero, and then they're going to consider zero comma b. And then they're going to maybe consider zero comma two b and then zero comma three b and so on until they reach the end. And then they come to b comma zero instead of one comma zero. Here they're going to come at b comma zero and then b comma b, b comma two b and so on. So that's what the outer loop iteration is going to do. And the inner loop iteration is going to basically for every block, for every such interval from zero to b or b to two b or two b to three b, it's going to iterate one by one on all the iteration points. So the inner loop looks like for i equals ii into b. So that's the starting point of the inner interval going till ii into b plus one. And because n may not be a multiple of b, so I basically take care of the boundary condition by saying minimum of ii into b plus one comma n, i plus plus. And similarly, I do a step increment for j. I say j equals jj into b to min of jj into b plus one comma nj plus plus. So the inner loops are basically iterating at an interval of one and the outer loops are iterating at an interval of b. And so, and the statement now is executed for all inside this loop nest of depth four. So when I do this, the question is, is it okay to do this? When is it okay to do this? And even before that, what is the advantage of doing this? So I think we have already discussed the advantage of blocking when we were talking about blocking in matrix multiplication. By doing this and choosing b carefully, what we can do is we can ensure that the memory footprint of the inner loop, inner two loops in this case, fit inside the cache, inside the L1 cache. And if we choose b in such a way, then basically we can increase the temporal locality and also possibly the spatial locality of the program. And we have seen this as a concrete example in matrix multiplication where we discussed how one could block, one could implement with this blocking transformation for matrix multiplication by hand. But let's say a compiler was to try to do this automatically. What are the conditions? And that too for the general S, right? I mean, may not be particularly the matrix multiplication statement. It could be any general statement. What should be the conditions on S under which such a transformation is legal? And that's the topic of today's module. But before we discuss that, let's look at the new iteration space pictorially and let's kind of compare the new execution order with the previous old execution order. So the iteration space is still identical. We have, you know, i and j and we are going from zero to n on j and zero to n on i. But this time for my first inner loop, for my first iteration of the inner two loops, this is the block. Let's say I assume b equals three. So I'm going to go from zero, zero, zero, one, zero, two. And I'm going to stop there because, you know, this is the case when i, i equals zero and j, j also equals zero, right? So in the outer two loops, I have one point which is i, i equals zero and j, j equals zero. And for that, I'm going to go from i equals zero to, okay, this should be actually i, i into, i, i plus one into b. So this is a mistake here. This should be i, i plus one into b, right? Comma n. And similarly, the second one here should be j, j plus one into b. All right. Okay, so I'm going to, in my inner loop, I'm going to go from zero, from i, i, from i equals zero, because i, i is zero, to i equals three, which is because b is equal to three. So I'm going to go from zero to three, but three is not included because it's strict less than, and so I go from zero, zero, one, two. That's for i. And for j also, it's again going from zero to three, which is again zero, one, two. So I get the square of three cross three, which is my single block, which is defined at i, i equals zero and j, j equals zero. Now, if I look at the execution order, these orange edges basically represent the new execution order. So I first execute zero comma zero, then zero comma one, then zero comma two, then one comma zero, one comma one, one comma two, and so on. Now I want to point out that when I do this, notice that in my original execution order, I would have executed zero comma three after zero comma two. But in my new execution order, I'm not executing zero comma three after zero comma two. I'm actually executing one comma zero after zero comma two. And then once I'm done with the whole block, once I've executed i equals two and j equals two, I execute the next block, which is i, i equals zero and j, j equals one. And so that point starts here. And now I have a new block here, which is, again, this is a three cross three block starting at i, i, i equals zero and j, j equals two. And so this block represents the second point on the outer two loops of my loop nest. Similarly, my third loop nest is going to go to this one here. I should just erase this because actually there is a mistake here. So let me just kind of erase this code here because I think we've already corrected this in a previous slide. Then I go from here to here, and this is again a three cross three block. And so we get another three cross three block and so on. Finally, in this toy example, they're going to be, because I chose B to be three and N to be six, I basically have four blocks. Now the question that I want to answer is, so first of all, the point of doing this blocking is so that I can better exploit my cache locality. And assuming that each of these blocks are basically have an access pattern such that their entire memory footprint fits in the cache, then I basically get a win. And basically, if it was true that this point here, let's say I equals one and J equals zero, and this point here, let's say which is I equals zero and J equals two, if they were going to access the same location, for example, right? Then this transformation would help us get better performance and better locality because in the original code, the reuse distance between I equals zero and J equals two and I equals one and J equals zero is pretty high because I would go all the way till the end. But in this new code, the reuse distance has decreased. And so that's the advantage of doing blocking. But the next question is, when is it okay to do this blocking? The question I want to ask is, when is this possible, all right? And so when I say when is this possible, of course I can come up with some very strict conditions on S, for example, if S was completely data independent, then this is possible because if each iteration of S has no dependency on any other iteration, which means if I was to draw a dependency graph here or dependency edges between different iteration points, if there were no edges, then it is always okay to do this kind of blocking. Okay, all right. But, and then here's an example where it's actually not possible. And if there were basically lots of dependency edges, so in this particular example, I assume that S is basically writing to A of B, I, J. So notice that B, I, J can be an arbitrary value. And if I use that as an index into an address, that basically means that each iteration point, I, J can basically access any point in A. And so basically, conservatively, I would assume that there are data dependencies between every iteration with every other iteration, okay? So basically, if I was to draw dependency edges, then there will be dependency edges with all possible, all possible, there will be a fully connected graph in that sense. Of course, we are restricted by the execution order. So we only draw edges from iterations that are executed before to iterations that are executed after, we have discussed this before, which basically means that in a 2D graph, in a 2D dependency graph, the theta, the angle of the dependency edge can only be between zero and 180 degrees, excluding 180 degrees, all right? Okay, so if I have this, then is this transformation valid? And the answer is no. And it's easy to see that if I look at this particular, any particular pair of points for whose iteration order is changed. So if I look at, for example, this point here, which is zero comma four, and if I look at this point here, which is two comma one, then the iteration order of zero comma four and two comma one in my original order was that zero comma four executes before two comma one in my original order. But in my new order, zero, two comma one, because two comma one is part of the first block, executes before zero comma four. So in my new order, two comma four executes before zero, two comma one executes before zero comma four. And so here is a, you know, here's an example of two iteration vectors, i comma j, i and j, such that i, or i one and i two, such that i one precedes i two in the original order and i two precedes i one in the new order. And if, but if in this example, because both of them actually have a data dependency, if they were basically, you know, if B is two comma one and B zero comma four were basically evaluating to the same value, then they would be writing to the same address. A, let's say B, B two comma one was, let's say zero. And similarly B zero comma four was also zero. Then basically both of them are going to be writing to A zero. And so the relative order matters, because if zero comma four executes before two comma one, I'm going to be writing a different value and the eventual value of A zero would be different from if the order was reversed, right? And so it is not always okay to do blocking. Here's a concrete example where it's not okay to do blocking. Now, okay, so here it is not okay to do blocking, but where is it actually okay to do blocking? What is the condition under which we can say it is safe to do blocking? Well, the condition is that if the relative order of the two iteration points has changed, then there should have been no data dependence between the two iteration points. And this condition actually looks identical to the condition that we had for pipelining, which was also very similar. It said that if I precedes J in first, and if I precedes J two in the other, then there should not be any data dependence between the two. And basically that boils down to saying that the relative order remains the same for things that are data dependent. In other words, if I was to draw the data dependence edges in my iteration space, then all the data dependence edges should have an angle or have an acute angle or a right angle. So anywhere between zero degrees and 90 degrees, including zero and 90. If my dependency edges have only, if all my dependency edges have this theta, then that basically means that their relative order will not change between blocking. If you can check for yourself that if the dependency edge basically has a 90 degree angle, then the two points between which that dependency edge has been drawn, their relative order does not change because of blocking. So let me take some examples. These purple edges here are basically representing dependency edges. So let's look at this particular dependency edge that's going from zero comma two to one comma three. Now notice that this is basically going in, it's an acute angle. So theta is basically something between zero and 90. And we can see that the relative order between zero comma two and one comma three is preserved between the original order, execution order and the new execution order. In both cases, zero comma two precedes. So let me just draw the writer like this. Zero comma two precedes one comma three. And that's true for both the original order and the new order. And actually you can take any two points and such that the line between them is a, such that the second point is basically executing after the first point. And the line between them is an acute angle between zero and 90. You would find that their relative order between the old order and the new order remains the same. Let's take a couple more examples. So let's say this was a right angle. So from zero comma, from two comma two, this point, this corner of the first block to this corner of the third block, which is three comma two, right? So two comma two to three comma two. This is a 90 degree edge. And even these two points, two comma two and three comma two, their relative order remains the same, which is two comma two executes before three comma two. Here's another example. Two comma four and three comma four. Once again, even in the original order, two comma four was executing before three comma four. And in the new order also, two comma four is executing before three comma four. But if I take some examples where theta is greater than 90 degrees, then I'm going to find that for some of those cases, the relative order has changed. So here are some examples where theta is between 90 and 180, excluding 90 and excluding 180. And here are the purple edges that show two such examples. So if I look at this example, which is zero comma three to two comma two, then I see that first of all, the theta here is basically greater than 90. And in the original order, zero comma three was preceding two comma two. But in the new order, two comma two precedes zero comma three. All right? And so in this case, basically, whenever theta is greater than 90 degrees, I'm basically, in this, here's an example where the relative order has changed. And also it turns out that the theta is 90 degrees. I'm claiming that whenever the relative order will change, it would be only changed for those cases in 2D space where theta was greater than 90. But I also wanted to point out that it's not the other way around. It's not necessary that whenever theta is greater than 90, then the relative order will change, all right? So the statement basically says the relative order changes only if theta was greater than 90. But it's not necessary that whenever theta is greater than 90, the relative order changes. So it's not an if and only if, it's an only if, right? And so, for example, here's an example going from three comma three to let's say four comma two. Now three comma three to four comma two, the angle is still greater than 90, but the relative order hasn't changed. In both cases, three comma three executes before four comma two, even in the original order and in the blocking order. All right, but we know that for all angles which is between zero and 90, we are pretty sure that the relative order doesn't change. And so what we can do, what we can infer from that is that it's okay to block as long as all my dependency edges are such that they belong to the zero comma 90 degrees range. And so here's a sufficient condition for when you can block. You can block whenever theta is, you can block whenever all the dependency edges belong to zero comma 90 degree angle theta. In other words, whenever theta is greater than 90, there should be no data dependence between those two iteration points. So any two iteration points which are, and if you draw a line between them when theta was greater than 90, then it should be true that in my original program, there is no data dependence in between those two iteration points. And if that condition is met, then it is okay to do blocking in that case. All right, and this is identical. I mean, this condition that we basically spelled out is identical to the condition of fully permutable loops that we also use for pipelining. And so basically what we are arriving at is that it is always possible to implement the blocking transformation for fully permutable loops. And if I look at my example of matrix multiplication where we were first introduced to blocking, notice that we have a three nest loop here for i equals zero, j equals zero, k equals zero to n. All three are going from zero to n. Cij plus equals Aik star Bkj. Now this is my matrix multiplication loop nest. In this case, it's a three level loop nest. And in fact, for this matrix multiplication, we do a three level blocking, depth three blocking. In the example that I've been showing so far in today's module, I was only doing depth two blocking, but matrix multiplication is example where we actually do a depth three blocking. And once again, it is okay to do, we can check for ourselves that this particular loop nest, the statement S that is part of the matrix multiplication routine is actually causing the entire loop nest to be a fully permutable loop nest. And this can be seen because data depend, if i and j are different, either i, let's take any two iteration points. Let's say i1, j1, k1 and i2, j2, k2. Now, if i1 comma j1 is not equal to i2 comma j2, which means either of i or j are different, then the two points are data independent anyway because they're only writing to different locations. And so they don't have any data dependence. First of all, the data dependence can only come from C because A and B are only being read. It's only C that's being written and also read. And so all the read after write or write after write or write after read, dependencies can come only from C. Moreover, if i1 comma j1 is different from i2 comma j2, they're different locations that are being written. So if i1 comma j1 is different from i2 comma j2, then the two iteration points are data independent anyway. And so the only data dependencies are when i1 equals i2 and j1 equals j2. And so the only kind of degree of freedom here is k. I mean, the only reason we could potentially have a data dependence is when, you know, because we could have a change in order of data dependence is because k is, because of k, because we can basically change the order of k, but we can see, we can check. So the question you want to ask is, is this loop totally permutable? And we can check different iteration orders. And basically what will happen is either we will move k to the left. So we're moving k to the upper loop or we move k to the really outermost loop or something like that. Irrespective of what order we choose for this iteration loop, we are going to find that the relative order of k's remains the same, right? So within a single i, j, different values of k would have the same relative order irrespective of what permutation I choose for i, j, k. And so that basically means that, because the only data dependent iterations can be the ones which have i1 equals i2 and j1 equals j2. And within those data dependent iterations, we are sure that, you know, when I'm doing blocking, forget about blocking, when I'm doing permutation of the loops, then the relative order of different i, j, k1 and i, j, k2 will remain the same because irrespective of where I take k, the relative order is going to remain the same. That basically means that this loop is fully permutable. And because this loop is fully permutable, it is okay to block it. And so that's why blocking in matrix multiplication is a legal transformation. But also we have, you know, now we have also know a more general condition which is the fully permutability of loops under which blocking is acceptable.
