Title: Compiler Design Module 34 : Semantic Analysis Introduction to Scope
Video ID: -OTt9IRBJKw
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

So far, we have discussed how to convert a linear sequence of characters or tokens to a parse tree and then to an abstract syntax tree. From here on, a program for us is just an abstract syntax tree. So the abstract syntax tree represents the program. And now we want to analyze that program further for correctness and also code generation and optimization and other things. So from now on in the course, we're just talking, whenever we say a program, we're really talking about the abstract syntax tree. So the first step that we do with the abstract syntax tree just after parsing is semantic analysis. And what is semantic analysis? Well, one way to think about it is it's a set of correctness checks that are context-sensitive. Context-sensitive stands in stark contrast to context-free. Recall that when we discussed context-free grammars, we were basically checking whether a program satisfies the context-free properties of the grammar or not. But those checks are only, are limited in the nature because they are context-free checks. This time we want to do context-sensitive checks. And what are some examples of context-sensitive checks? We're going to see them very soon. But anything that cannot be done in the parsing step and because it was context-sensitive, is basically done in the semantic analysis. So here are some examples of context-sensitive analysis. For example, all identifiers in the program are declared before use. So why is this a context-sensitive analysis? Well, it's not just about whether something is an identifier or not, which would be an analysis of the lexa, but it's also about what are all the identifiers that have been defined till this point. So that forms a context of the program at any program point. And so, whether the answer is yes or no depends on what is the context at that point. For example, the context could be what are all the identifiers declared until now. Similarly, type checking is a context-sensitive analysis as we're going to see soon. So the set of legal programs is a subset of the set of parsable programs. This is generally true. We said that some programs pass the lexing stage, then some programs pass the parsing stage, and then all the programs that pass the parsing stage are parsable programs, and then the semantic analysis stage is going to do some further checks on it, and it's going to determine the set of legal programs. And these legal programs will be, by definition, a subset of all the parsable programs. So here is an example of a context-sensitive semantic analysis. It's actually a very common analysis, which is scope. All right, so what is scope? Well, for example, scope can be used to match identifier declarations with its users. So let's take this example program or example function from the C programming language, the function foo that takes one argument n of type integer, and it has some body, it's just an arbitrary body, but it declares some variables. So for example, it declares a variable a, and it declares another variable i. And then it starts using some of these variables. For example, in this printf statement, it's using the variable a. Now, what is a referring to needs to be determined, because a is just an identifier, and the parsing state just said that a is an identifier, and that's it, right? And it just said that this is a function call. And it just said that printf is also an identifier. But we never basically checked whether printf is actually a function or not. We never really checked whether a is actually a defined declared variable or not. These kind of things come under the purview of scope, which is a semantic analysis. Similarly, here's a statement for i is equal to zero, i is less than ni++. Given that the program has reached the semantic analysis state, we are already sure that this particular statement is well-parsable. What that means is that the for statement, the for keyword or the for construct is correctly formed. It has an initialization condition, it has a check condition and a step condition. And these are all the checks that are done during the parsing state, because these are context-free checks. But here are some context-sensitive checks in the same example. For example, what is i? What does it refer to? That would be a part of scope. And in this case, this i refers to this one, right? Also notice that in this example, the body of the for function declares an other a. And this a is different from the a in the outside scope. And this a refers to the closest a that has been declared, and so on. And finally, when I come out of the for loop, I again use a, and this time, the a is actually the outer scope a. So let's look at this. So for example, what is n? Well, n is actually referring to this declaration that's coming from the function argument, n. What are these two a's? These are coming from the outer declaration of int a equals zero in the body of foo. What is printf? Well, actually, in this program fragment, I haven't really declared printf. So strictly speaking, this is an illegal program just because of this. But if I wanted to, I could have declared printf somewhere outside of this scope, of scope of foo, and then this would refer to that particular printf. What is i? Well, i is referring to this particular declaration i. And what is the a inside the loop body? Well, these two a's are referring to this particular declaration that is within the loop body. Okay, so these kinds of resolutions of what does an identifier actually refer to comes under the purview of scope rules. Also, here is another example, j. And in fact, if you see, j is not declared anywhere, and so this program has another error. None of these errors, printf or j, would be caught by the context-free grammar, but they will be caught by the semantic analysis phase. In particular, it will be caught by the scoping rules. All right, so what is a scope? Here's the definition of scope. The scope of an identifier is the portion of the program in which that identifier is accessible, all right? So for example, what is the portion of the program in which i is accessible? Well, it would be the entire function body after the declaration of i. Similarly, what is the portion of the program in which the second a is accessible? That would be the body of the foreigner after the declaration of a, and so on. All right, so some subtleties about scope, which we may be already familiar with, same identifier may refer to different things in different parts of the program. I'm putting things in quotes, and I'm going to explain why. But the point is that the same identifier may refer to different things in different parts of the program, and we already saw that with the example. The same identifier a is referring to different things. In one case, a is referring to the outer declaration, and the other case, a is referring to the inner declaration of the for loop, inside the for loop. So a corollary of this is that different scopes of the same name don't overlap, all right? So because we need a way to distinguish between identifiers, if the identifier has the same name, there's actually no way to distinguish. So if two different identifiers have the same name, but they're actually referring to different things, then their scopes must be distinct. It can't happen that in the same scope, both the things which have the same identified name are present, right, are accessible. Either one of them is, so for example, in the inner for loop, only the inner a is accessible. The outer a is not accessible. So the inner for loop is not the scope. The scope does not include that part of the program, which is the inner for loop after the declaration of the inner a. All right, why do I say things, and why do I put it in quotes? Well, because identifiers are used to denote or represent multiple things. They can be used to represent objects, memory objects. By objects, I mean, typically I mean regions of memory. All right, so for example, a variable is an object. So when I say int v, so I'm basically allocating the region of memory for this variable v. And v is the identifier that denotes the object represented by v. But there can be other things that identifiers represent. For example, identifiers can represent types. For example, an identifier could represent a struct type in C. So I could just struct foo and something. And then whenever I say foo, struct foo, then the foo basically represents that particular type that has been defined. And so that would also be qualified as a thing. It could be a function, a declaration. In object-oriented languages, it could be a class name. And there are other things that you could do with identifier names. For example, template names or template type variables in languages like C++ and so on. So identifiers are used to represent different things. And everything should have some type of scope rules saying that what identifier can represent what thing at what point based on the structure of the program as defined by the scoping rules. So in our example, we said that there are two objects in this case, one is A, and the other is another A. And this time to distinguish it, I just used float different type for the second one and the first one is still an int A. And notice that the scope one, so I'm using scope one for the scope of the first A, the integer A, and that is represented by these red lines. The notice that it doesn't include scope two, which is the region where the second A, float A is accessible, right? So scopes of different objects can overlap, but if the two objects are the same name, then they cannot overlap because if they overlap, then there will be an ambiguity. Okay. So there is another scope is of two types in typically in languages. One is static scope and other is dynamic scope. Most languages use static scope and that's why most of us are familiar with static scoping. In fact, the example that I used was using static scoping. More formally, if the scope depends only on the program text and not on runtime behavior, then it's called static scope, right? And in fact, all the examples that we saw, where is A accessible, it only depends on how the program is structured and has nothing to do with the runtime behavior of the program. All right. In contrast, a language could be dynamically scoped. In this case, scope depends on execution behavior of the program, okay? So let's take an example. Let's look at this example, which has two functions and let's assume that this is a dynamically scoped language, although I'm using C-like syntax, but C is not statically scoped while this language I'm assuming to be dynamically scoped. And let's say in a dynamically scoped language, let's say I define a function foo and then I call bar from the function after declaring a variable A. Now inside, in a dynamically scoped language, what could happen is that inside bar, I could actually access A because A is in the runtime set of mappings for this particular program, right? So for example, when I call bar three and I say printf %da, then I can expect if this is a dynamically scoped language, then I could expect that this is going to print three because of the declaration A equals three here, all right? So this would be a dynamically scoped language. Notice that A is not present in the static scope of the language, but A is present in the dynamic scope if it has been called from foo. Now you may ask what happens if bar is called from a function where A is not present. For example, let's say we have a function called foo two or bars, which basically calls bar without declaring A. In that case, that would be a runtime error, all right? So those are the kind of semantics that some languages would have. What are some examples of languages that used dynamically scoping? First of all, it's extremely rare today, but there were early versions of Lisp that used dynamic scoping before Lisp actually transitioned to static scoping. Also, there was a language called Snowball that was using dynamic scoping. All right, so let's take an example to understand how do identifiers get declared and then what are their scope rules. So identifier bindings are introduced in different ways in different languages. In fact, and also we said that identifier bindings could bind to different types of things, right? So they could bind either to objects or types or function declarations or something else, right? So identifier bindings are introduced by different things. So for example, they could be introduced by function definitions. I could define a function called, let's say printf or foo, and that would introduce a binding. Every time a binding is introduced, we also need to basically have some rules to say what are the scope under which that binding is accessible. All right, so function definitions are a way to introduce bindings for methods. And these bindings basically give you method names and so that way you are able to access those methods. Similarly, struct definitions in C provide bindings for type names. Variable definitions introduce object names, right? Introduce object names, right? So they provide bindings for names to objects. Already recall that objects are nothing but regions of memory. Structure field definition. So inside of a C struct, I could say int A, int B, these would be the fields of that particular struct. And they're also basically names for, you know, you can say sub-objects of objects of that particular type. And so I'm also going to call them bindings for object names, although they are sub-objects of a type. So they are different types of bindings actually. And then function argument declarations. So I can also create bindings because of function argument declarations. We saw that in that example. For example, if the argument is int N, then I have created a binding from N to the argument value. And depending on whether it's a call by value or a call by reference, it's either a temporary copy of the argument that was passed from the caller, or it is actually a reference to the object that is existing in the caller. All right. Okay, here's some interesting facts about scoping. Typically, scoping rules obey the most closely nested rule, which means that if I use an identifier A, then I basically look at the most closely nested declaration of A. So we saw this example where if I use the A inside the body of function of the for loop, then that particular use is basically binding to the closest declaration, the closest nested scope in which it was declared. In this case, it is the scope of the for loops body. That's called the most closely nested rule, okay? And most scoping rules basically follow this rule. However, there are exceptions. For example, in C++, member functions can be defined outside class definition and yet access class members. So in C++, you could have a class definition and you could have members of the class, and then you could have some methods or functions inside the class, member functions, and the definition of that function can appear outside of the class. Also, the body of these member functions can access the member objects of the class from within the body. Now notice that in the static scoping nesting rule that we have just observed, the function that's defined outside of the class does not actually have the member variables declared in any of the nested statics, statically nested loop scopes of that definition, but still we are able to access it, and that's because the rules basically permit you to also access the class, and that's given by the qualification of the member function definition using the class name and things like that. Those rules are also pretty easy to understand, just that they're not following the most closely nested rule, and this is an exception to that rule. Actually, there are more exceptions. For example, forward declaration. So typically, we would imagine that something should be used only after it has been defined, or with the declaration and the definition, but often there are forward declarations in C and C++ where I could define something using an external keyword, and then actually declare you something with an external keyword and then define it later and use it in the middle. So those will be called forward declarations, and there are also exceptions to this rule that you just look upwards and look at the closest nested scope, most closely nested scope, to basically identify the object or the thing, whatever you're looking for. There are also examples in C++ where, for example, within a class in C++, the member objects can be defined later, but accessed earlier in the function bodies, and that's perfectly okay, in which case the order is really immaterial, whether I define, as long as those member objects are present somewhere in the class declaration, we are okay. And that is also kind of, can be thought of as an exception to this most closely nested rule, which would basically look for the closest nesting that has the identifier, and it has it before the use, right? So that's not necessarily followed in C++ class definitions either. In many languages, declaration order is immaterial. So it's not just C++ class, but also many other languages. For example, I can think of Perl, or I think even Python. These languages don't really care about the declaration order, especially for functions or method names. So I could basically declare a method name later, and define it later, and use it earlier, and the runtime would be able to figure out and search for it. Although it still follows, it still looks for its scope, and it still follows the most closely nested scope rule, but it doesn't really follow the order of in which it should appear. The declaration can actually appear after the use in such languages.
