Title: Compiler Design Module 120 : Computational Structure of a Region based DFA
Video ID: UjS378OAj8c
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

Now we're going to talk about the computational structure of a region-based DFA. We already talked about how to construct a region hierarchy, but then how does a DFA work on regions? We have also discussed this to some extent in an informal way, but we are going to concretize that discussion in this module. So the first part of the region-based DFA is to identify transfer function for each region and subregions. Notice that the region hierarchy has many regions, some nested within the other, and we need to first identify transfer function for each of these regions, at each level of the hierarchy. This requires a bottom-up pass. For example, first basic blocks transfer functions are derived from individual statements transfer function. This derivation may be either trivial, which means just composition of the individual instructions, or something more sophisticated, for example, symbolic analysis. Next, maybe the loop body's transfer function is derived from the basic blocks transfer function. So all the basic blocks transfer functions are there, and then the loop body is an acyclic graph, let's say the innermost loop body is an acyclic graph on those basic blocks, and then you want to basically summarize what is the transfer function of this loop body. Once again, you can use a trivial composition of the individual functions to identify a summary function, or you can use some more sophisticated analysis, such as symbolic analysis. And finally, you get the loop's transfer function from the loop body's transfer function. So once you have the transfer function of a loop body, then you want to identify the transfer function of the entire loop, which also includes the back edges. And once again, one idea here is to just use a trivial summary, which is just create a function that applies the transfer function of the loop body repeatedly until there's a fixed point. Or you could do a more sophisticated analysis, such as a symbolic analysis, for identifying the transfer function of a loop based on the transfer function of the loop body. Recall that the kind of analysis that we motivated this whole region-level analysis discussion was actually doing something like a symbolic analysis, which was identifying the transfer function of the entire loop from the transfer function of the body of the loop. For example, the body is incrementing a variable by 10, and the loop is iterating n times, and the entire loop is basically incrementing the variable by 10 into n, or something like that. And that would be the symbolic analysis used to do a bottom-up identification of the loop's transfer function from the loop body's transfer function. And that was a sophisticated analysis. You could have also just used a trivial fixed-point analysis to identify the transfer function, in which case the region-based analysis wouldn't have given you enough advantage in this particular loop. So, once we are done with the bottom-up analysis, and identified the transfer functions of all the regions, we compute the data flow values at each program point by using these summary transfer functions for entire regions. Now that we have transfer functions for all the regions, at every level you can just use a DFA analysis, which is your typical DFA fixed-point iteration, to identify the values at each program point. And I am just going to use a summary transfer function. And I am going to do this in a top-down manner. So, this is going to be a top-down analysis. For example, I am going to first do a DFA on the top level of the region hierarchy between the root node and the children of the root node. So, children of the root node are going to form a graph, and I am going to do a DFA on that graph. Notice that the children of the root node are going to be regions, which will have their own summary transfer function. And while doing the DFA at that level, I am going to utilize those summary transfer functions. And with that, I would basically get all the DFA values at all the boundaries of these sub-regions of the root node. But now if I want to identify the internal values, internal to any of these sub-regions, then I need to traverse one level down the hierarchy to basically repeat the procedure between the level 1 regions and level 2 sub-regions. So, top-down analysis involves descending down the region hierarchy to identify the program values for internal points. So, here is an example. Let's say I have this program, sum equals 0, i equals 0, i is less than n, sum plus equals i, i plus plus. And I want to identify the transfer functions for the available expressions analysis for this kind of a program. Now, the first thing I am going to do here is I am going to construct a region hierarchy. And we already know what a region hierarchy is going to look like. It's going to be a loop body, then the whole loop, and then the whole procedure. And so, when I do this bottom-up traversal to basically identify the transfer functions, this is my first level, I should say the second-last level of my region hierarchy that's going to have the loop body region, and it's going to have a self-edge, and then this is going to be the basic log, and this is what my sub-graph is going to look at this particular level. Now, for this, I need to have a summary transfer function for the loop body region. Recall that I am assuming that my basic logs are my leaf nodes, so it's easy to identify the transfer function for the first node here. It's just the transfer function of the basic log that is already available to us. It's a leaf node. But I need to identify the transfer function of the loop body region. What is the loop body? It checks whether i is less than n. If it is not, then it goes to exit. If it is, then it goes to sum plus equals i, and i plus plus. Let me just label this. This is the true branch, and that's the false branch. Now, if I do symbolic analysis, and I can see that Fb m equals m prime, so if there's an input mapping of the variables, then the output mapping is m prime, and the transfer function Fb basically represents what m prime will be in terms of m. So Fb is the transfer function of the body of the loop. And from this, from symbolic analysis, I can say m prime i would be mi plus 1. So whatever is the input value, I'm going to just increase by 1, and that's going to be the value of i in terms of available expressions at the output map. Similarly, m prime sum equals m sum plus mi. And that's just coming from the individual instructions, and just do a symbolic analysis to figure this out. Now, based on Fb, I'm going to try at the next level to create a summary transfer function of the entire loop, which also includes the back edge. And that's my next step. I'm going to identify the transfer function of the entire loop in a bottom-up manner, just like we have been doing so far. And let's say my transfer function of the entire loop is Fl, and I use ml to denote the output mapping for Fl. So if there's an input mapping m, then what is the output mapping ml for all the variables? In this case, the two variables i and sum. So based on symbolic analysis, I will be able to say that ml of i is either mi or n, depending on which one is minimum. Actually, this should have been maximum, not minimum. So the point here is that, notice that there's a check here, i is less than n, and our symbolic analysis, sophisticated symbolic analysis, is able to figure out that if mi, which is the initial value that comes into the loop region, notice that the loop region kind of only has one input and one output, and whatever is happening inside the loop body, maybe multiple iterations, is completely hidden from us at this level. We want to summarise the entire loop region as a single transfer function Fl. And I'm saying that if the initial value, mi, is greater than n, then nothing happens because I'm going to just go out and go to the exit. And so mli would be maximum of mi, n. So if the loop was not even entered, which is the case if mi was greater than n, greater than equal to n, I'm just going to get mi. And if the loop was entered, then I'm going to keep iterating till I reach n. I'm assuming unsigned numbers here. And so till I reach n, I'm going to basically keep iterating, and so I'm going to exit only when it is n, because mi was less than n, and so in the second case, mi would be less than n initial, initial value would be less than n, and I would keep incrementing till I reach n, and when I reach n, I'm going to exit. So mli, which is the value at loop exit, would be either the value at loop entry if that loop value was greater than n, or it would be just n. And this requires some sophisticated analysis, but let's say there is some sophisticated analysis. We are not discussing how that sophisticated analysis is going to work. It is going to use some algebraic kind of reasoning, and we're going to talk about that later. But even if I have that, then how is it integrating into the region-based analysis? That is what our current discussion is. Similarly, my symbolic analysis would be able to figure out that at the end of the loop, ml sum would be whatever is the initial value of msum plus summation of mi to n-1j. So this basically, from mi, it counts upwards till n-1. If mi was greater than n-1, then this whole value evaluates to 0, and we just get msum. But if mi was less than or equal to n-1, then I get some summation terms here. And once again, this can be just identified using some kind of symbolic analysis. And with this transfer function, fl, I am able to express ml in terms of m. And this is a big step, because I am able to express the mapping of the variables in terms of available expressions at the end of the loop in terms of the mapping of the variables and the beginning of the loop. So the entire loop, all the iterations of the loop have been summarized in this case as a single function. And this is a sophisticated symbolic analysis, which may not be possible for every possible loop, in which case there is always a fallback option of doing what? Of basically, fl internally just having a body which just executes fl in a loop till it reaches a fixed point, just like your basic data flow analysis. And so based on this, I am going to go to my next level. And my next level is going to make a region out of this whole thing into a procedure region. And now I want to have a summary transfer function for the entire procedure region. And let me call it fp, which produces a mapping mp for an input mapping m. And now I would be able to combine the two. Now this one is easy, because I already know what is the summary transfer function for loop region, which is fl. And that basically says that ml of i equals mi plus maximum of mi, n. And I know, this time I know that using available expressions, I will know that at this particular point, the mi would be 0, and msum would also be 0. And so all I need to do is basically apply the transfer function fl on this mapping, where i is mapped to 0 and sum is mapped to 0. And I am going to get mp, which is just going to be max of 0, n, which is n, assuming unsigned, because that means n can only be greater than or equal to 0. And similarly, I am going to get msum plus summation of 0 to n minus 1 j. And msum is just 0, because that is the input value mapping that we have. And summation of 0 to n minus 1 of j can be simplified to n into n minus 1 by 2. And that is what I get in this particular transfer function. Now, I want to highlight here that the transfer function doesn't need to be a closed form syntax formula. It doesn't necessarily need to have n into n minus 1 by 2 or something like that. I could have had a loop inside my transfer function, which just computes the sum from 1 to n or something like that. A transfer function needs to be a computable function. It need not be a closed form formula. It just needs to be a computable function. And so transfer functions need to be computable or terminating functions. I should be able to make a call to the transfer function for some input mapping m. And that transfer function should basically terminate. So by computable, I mean it should be a terminating execution. I shouldn't have to wait forever. In fact, it should ideally have a bounded running time. And within that running time, it should give me the answer. And so that any body of a loop, any body of a function that is definitely terminating can be our potential transfer function for a region. And that is how, in fact, we were constructing trivial summaries based on the fixed point in the first place. When we said that one trivial summary transfer function of any region can be just created by running the fixed point iteration on the constituent graph on the subregions, that basically means that I don't have a fixed point expression for the summary transfer function, but I do have a body which can be computable. What is the guarantee of termination for the trivial transfer function? The guarantee of termination for the trivial transfer function is the same guarantee that we have for the DFA analysis. The transfer function, the summary transfer function, the trivial summary transfer function is going to execute the fixed point iteration and we are guaranteed that the fixed point will be reached within a finite number of iterations because the lattice for our DFA analysis is assumed, is supposed to be a finite height lattice. And so the trivial summaries based on fixed point are not necessarily closed form expressions, but they are also computable terminating functions. And that's what our requirement is for these summary transfer functions. Okay, here are some examples. So let's say I wanted to identify what is the value at P1 for my available expressions analysis. Well, what I'm going to do is I'm just going to, this is easy, it's the end of the basic law. And so I'm going to, you know, basically I'm going to have to do a top-down analysis. Maybe I first look at the procedure region. Inside the procedure region, I only get two values. One is at the beginning of the procedure and one is at the end of the procedure. And so that's not good enough. P1 is neither the beginning of the procedure nor the end of the procedure. So I'm going to go to the next level of the hierarchy, which is this level of the hierarchy that has two nodes. One is the basic law and one is the loop region. And it's an acyclic graph at this stage. And at this level itself, I would be able to basically, you know, identify the value at P1 because I just need to apply F1 and I have got the value of P1. I don't need to go any deeper in my region hierarchy. On the other hand, for example, if I was interested in this particular value, let me call that Q1, then I would have had to go deeper because F1 would have only given me the summary of the entire basic law. But now I may be interested in some internal instruction of the basic law, in which case I'm going to now apply the transfer function of this particular instruction to get the value at Q1. Okay. In general, how it's going to work, at every level of the hierarchy, I'm going to first compute the DFA on that level of the hierarchy and I'm going to get the boundary values for that level of regions. And based on those boundary values, if I'm interested in some internal point for a certain region, then I can use the computed value at the beginning of that region to compute the value internal to that region. This is for a forward dataflow analysis. For a backward dataflow analysis, I would use the value at the end of the region to compute the value internal to the region. So here, let's look at another example. Let's say I wanted to compute the value at P2 and notice that here P2 is not just the entry of the loop, but it is actually the entry of the head of the loop. So, you know, there is a back edge that's coming at P2 as well. So P2, for example, is different from this location here, which is basically the first time the loop is entering. P2 is actually a location which gets entered multiple times if the loop executes multiple times. And if I want to compute the value at P2, I'm going to again descend down my region hierarchy. I'm going to first do the DFA on procedure region. And of course, I don't need to do it for every point separately. I mean, all of these points are going to be done in one go. So basically, but to get the value of P2, if I was only interested in getting the value of P2, I would first get the, do the DFA on the procedure region. I will get the values at the beginning and the end. Then I would go to the next level and I would get the values at P1, beginning of the loop region, which is the first entry of the loop region and end of the loop region. Now notice that this particular point here, which is the entry of the loop region, is not the same as P1. P1 is executed multiple times, but this particular point here is only executed once. So I will have to now go deeper into the hierarchy to get the value for P1 and that's the next level. And here I'm going to use this particular value. So let's say this particular value here is let's say Q2. Using Q2, I will get the value for P2. Sorry, I may have been saying P1. I meant P2 when I was comparing this with this point. Okay, now using Q2, I want to find the value for P2 and so I would go to the next level of the hierarchy. And this time using Q2, I would basically say, okay, from Q2, this is what happens and then from Q2 to P2, this is what happens. So I'm going to have to implement, basically execute a data flow analysis to basically figure out what is the value at P2 because P2 would have the value which is coming from Q2 and repetitive applications of the transfer function of the loop body. In other words, value of P1 meet with application of FB on F1M0 plus FB square F1M0. F1M0 is the value at P1, right? So value at P1 or this is nothing but F1M0 where M0 is the value at the start of the program, entry of the program. And then I meet it with the, you know, I apply FB once, then I apply FB twice, thrice, till I reach a fixed point and I keep meeting it and that's the value that would be computed for P2. So the region hierarchy is only helping us compute, you know, at the higher level, it's only helping us compute the values at the boundaries of the region. If I want to compute values internal to the regions, then I need to implement, you know, I want me to execute my data flow analysis inside that particular region to basically get the values at internal points. Similarly, if I wanted to compute the value at P3, now let's say I already have the value at P2, then how do I get the value at P3? Well, that's easy, that's just apply, let's say this was FS, then I just apply FS to the value at P2.
