Title: Compiler Design Module 48 : Activation Records
Video ID: b_sTkqzpQFE
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

So now that we have learned about activations and their lifetimes, we will talk about what information is required to implement an activation. And so this information we also call an activation record. So if the program is executing and it has a number of active activations, then we already know that these number of activations can be represented as a stack. And so we can think of this as a stack of activations and we discussed this last time. And now we're going to talk about what is the information that's stored to implement each activation. And so that's what we're going to call an activation record. And so we are basically maintaining a stack of activation records. So in our previous example, for example, main was calling F3, then F2 and so on. So what we will basically be maintaining is an activation record for the first activation of F, which is F3, then the activation record of F2 and so on until whatever is the last, most recent activation that was created. Okay, so what's in an activation record? And before we talk about that, an activation record is also commonly called a frame. So if F calls G, then G's activation record contains two types of information. One is what is the information that's required to complete the execution of G? So whatever is the information that's required for G's execution to complete? For example, what were the arguments that were supplied to G? And then what is the information that's required to resume the execution of F from where it left off? So in other words, the activation record of a function activation contains information that is required to complete the execution of the current activation and resume the activation of the caller activation. So that's what it means. So recall that F is suspended until G completes, at which point F resumes. And so we need to have enough information in G's activation to be able to resume F's activation. So let's look at this example. It's the same example that we looked at last time. The three functions G, F, and main, and F is a recursive function. Now, there are a couple of interesting program points that we are going to mark here with these asterisk signs. So star, star, star, and triple star. So there are three kind of code addresses that I'm marking with these markers. And notice that all these three code addresses are basically right after the function call. So for example, main makes a function call F. And so the instruction that just follows that function call, which is probably we're just going to take the return value of F3 and return it as the return value of main, that instruction I'm going calling the star. I'm marking using the star marker. Similarly, I have a double star marker at this point where F is calling Fx minus 1. So Fx is calling Fx minus 1. And I have a triple star marker for the instruction where Fx is calling G. And so the instruction just after the call to G is marked with the triple star marker. Now, why do I need to mark these things? Well, as you can imagine, if I am inside the activation of G, then the activation record of G must have this information of where I need to return to be able to resume the activation of F. And so the activation record of G should contain this marker, triple star marker. Similarly, the activation record of Fx minus 1 should contain this information about the double star marker so that that's where you need to resume your caller activation. So with that background, here are some example activation record fields that may be required to implement activations. So this is the result of that activation. So you call the function, you call the procedure. Procedure activation got instantiated. Maybe you want to basically know what is the result of this activation. And you may want to return this result back to the caller. And so the activation record of this function contains the result so that the caller can use it after the activation is finished. Similarly, it should have information about the arguments of that function with which it was called. I'll come to the control link in a minute. The return address. So after this activation is finished, then where should I return? And that's exactly these star markers that I had that I talked about earlier. So this is the code address where the activation should return after being finished. So it's going to return to the caller. So the return address will typically be a code address within the call. And control link is a pointer to the caller's activation. So it's not just enough to know the caller's return address, the caller's address where I need to return, which is my return address. But it's also important to know what is the information in the, how should I be able to retrieve the caller's activation record. And to do that, I'm going to use a pointer to the caller's activation. And I'm calling it a control link. So notice that control link is basically the data that is required to resume the caller and return address is the pointer to the code address that is required to resume the caller. So for example, here is let's assume that I have a function, an activation stack where main calls f3, calls f2, calls f1, calls g. So I have this activation stack. And so I'll have activations for each of these activations. And so let's look at, let's consider what would be the activation of this particular call f3. So the argument, there's only one argument. So the argument would be 3. The result hasn't been computed yet because it's still executing. So the result field is empty. The control link would be the pointer to the main's activation record. So main function's activation record. I haven't shown the main function's activation record. But let's say there is a main function's activation record. And this field here is going to store a pointer to it. And finally, the return address. And notice that the return address is here is the single star because that's where it wants to return when it finishes this activation f3. Now let's look at the next activation in the activation stack, which is f2. So what would be the activation record for f2? Now f2's activation record is also similar because the result hasn't been computed yet. The argument is 2 this time instead of 3. The control link is no longer main's ar. But it is going to point to f3's ar this time because that's the caller. And the return address is also changed because it's no longer the single star, but the double star because that's where you want to return. So the return address is also different. Similarly, if you look at f1's ar, the only difference is that the argument has become 1. The control link is now f2's activation record or ar. And the return address is again double star. And finally, f0's ar, similar. Nothing spectacular here. The argument is 0. The control link is f1's ar. And the return address is also double star. And finally, we have g's ar. And so now maybe the g's has almost just finished executing. And so now g has a result. And the result here is 1, which will be used by the caller ar when it resumes. There is no argument to g. And so this is nil. And control link is pointing to f0's ar because that's where g was called from. And the return address this time is the triple star, which is a different address from the previous two return addresses that we saw. So that's how what an activation record in our simple language may look like. And indeed, that's the typical type of information that a compiler would want to maintain to be able to finish the execution of the current activation and to be able to resume the caller activation. So if I look at the stack of activation record, it's going to look something like the following. There will be main's activation record, followed by f3's activation record, f2's activation record, and so on until g's activation record. This is something that we have already seen that activations can, because activations are properly nested, they can be represented as a stack. Also, the control links in these activation records are basically pointing to their parent. For example, g's ar, the control link in g's ar is pointing to f0's ar. The control link in f0's ar is pointing to f1's ar. And so on. So while I show this as a stack of ar's, and it's a general stack in the sense that the activations could be anywhere in the memory, usually in practice, the stack is not as abstract and is usually organized as an array, which means because the stack is just going to grow and shrink, why not just store each of these activations contiguously as an array? And that has some advantages. For example, now the control link computation can become simpler. For example, maybe I don't even need to store the pointer. Or even if I need to store the pointer, maybe I just need to store the offset to the previous activation in the same array. And because this kind of layout of an array will have stronger invariants on what control links can point to. And I could potentially, I mean by I, I mean the compiler could potentially use that to optimize the code it generates. So typically, compilers exploit this contiguous stack layout to omit having to store some information, such as the control links. So it is possible for the, in some scenarios, in some environments, in some settings, that you don't need to store the control link. In fact, when the, when, for example, g finishes, it is evident where f0's ar would be by just adding an offset to the current activation. To the current stack pointer to get to the f0's ar and so on. We're going to see this in more detail as we look at code generation in more detail. Further, some information can be kept in registers. So while in my original description of an activation record, I said the return address is there, the control link is there, the arguments are there, and the result is there. Maybe some of these things you don't want to actually keep in memory, and you can also keep them in registers. So one very common example is the return value. So maybe the return value, because it's such a common thing, you can avoid memory accesses by just keeping the return value in a register. And so the callee can populate that register, and the caller can read that register to understand what is the return value. Similarly, there are other things that you could, you could store in registers. For example, the caller can pass information to the callee, the arguments. One way to do that is to basically populate fields inside the callee's activation record corresponding to arguments. The other option is to just use registers to pass arguments. Now, usually programming languages will provide a potentially unbounded number of arguments, but there's only a very small number of registers available on a machine. So typical calling conventions would say that the first few arguments would be passed in registers, and the other arguments would be passed in memory as part of the activation record. The important thing is this activation record is laid out by the compiler. And so what should be the layout of an activation record is decided at compile time. So maybe the compiler has some logic to figure out what is the activation record that it needs. Typically, the compilers use the same layout of the activation record for all programs, but there are some options available, for example, for compilers like GCC or LLVM, where you can kind of choose what is the layout of the activation record that you need. These layouts are also kind of come under the purview of calling conventions because they dictate what is the contract between the caller and the callee. So the AR layout is part of this contract between the caller and the callee. The code that is generated by the compiler is tightly coupled with this layout that has been already decided. So depending on what is the layout, the generated code would appropriately be different. For example, if you are expecting the return value in a register, then the generated code would reflect that particular problem and so on. And this responsibility of who populates the... So the AR layout is a contract that has to be decided by the compiler and this is a first step. But after the AR layout is decided, who populates the AR? Who populates the activation record? Should it be the caller that populates the activation record or is it the function itself that populates the activation record? And the answer is it's both. So the responsibility is shared. The arguments are populated by the caller, for example. The return value, of course, is populated by the function itself and so on. And we're going to see some examples of what strategies make sense and what don't.
