Title: Compiler Design Module 143 : Space Partitioning Example
Video ID: rkHFZD1zJ8Q
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

So last time we started talking about how we can have an affine partition, how an affine partition can be identified based on the data dependencies such that we have maximized the amount of parallelism. So recall that every statement S1, let's say there are two statements, but for every statement there is an iteration space. So let's say this is the iteration space for S1 and let's say this is the iteration space for S2. And then there is a processor space which is the space of all the processor IDs. And just like the iteration space is some L1 dimension space and similarly a polyhedral space and similarly this one is an L2 dimensional polyhedral space for L2, similarly there is a K dimensional polyhedral space for processors. The reason we use a K dimensional space is so that we can fit it into the polyhedral model. And so because everything is, we're talking in terms of linear algebra and affine relations and stuff like that, so using polyhedral space or processor space all makes a lot of sense and kind of gives us a homogeneous way of treating processors along with iterations. And so in this kind of setting, now we are interested in finding an affine function from the iteration space to the processor space and affine function recall is specified by two quantities, one is a matrix capital C, in this case capital C1 for S1 and small c1, which is the vector, which is the additive vector. Similarly for S2 we have another affine function which is characterized by capital C2 and small c2. And here is a trivial solution, the trivial solution is capital C1 equals a zero matrix, small c1 also equals a zero vector, capital C2 also equals a zero matrix and small c2 also equals a zero vector. And this basically gives us a solution but this is not a very good solution, this is a trivial solution because it does not give me any parallelism. So we are interested in solutions for capital C1 and capital C2 such that the dimension of the processor space is maximized. Basically we are interested in maximizing the number of points in the range of these functions and because this is a k dimensional space, in other words we are interested in maximizing the dimension or if k is the dimension of the range of these functions then we are interested in maximizing k. And so although this is a trivial solution to our space partitioning constraints, this is not very useful because there is no parallelism. Now here is a max rank solution which could be the best possible solution ever for any program is that C1 is basically the identity matrix. So 1 here represents the fact that there is a category of processors, one dimension, so I just give one dimension in the processor space for the statement. So if C equals i, first of all, i has a dimension of equal to the dimension of the iteration space, i is the identity matrix. So the identity matrix of dimension L1, where L1 is the dimension of the iteration space of S1 has rank L1 and that's the maximum rank that C1 can, that's the maximum kind of, the identity matrix, what does it do? It basically maps every point in the iteration space to a unique processor and so that's the best you could have done, every iteration in S1 is going to a unique processor. And so i is the maximum rank solution that you could ever hope for, for any program. Also I have this row called 1, concatenated at the very bottom basically to indicate that it is, so maybe I want to map one iteration of S1 to a different processor from the same iteration of S2, if they were in the same loop nest or something like that. So basically to distinguish between S1 and S2, I can have an extra row to basically increase one more dimension of the processor space that represents whether I am a processor for executing S1 iterations or whether I am a processor for executing S2 iterations. And in the ideal case, if I have two statements, each of them has iteration space of dimensions L1 and L2, then the processor space basically has the dimension maximum of L1, L2 plus 1, where the last one is basically meant for capturing which statement it is. So that's what this one row or two row here basically indicates. And then small c1 and small c2 can be zero because I don't really care about the additive constant. Notice that the additive constant is only, doesn't really make much difference in this example, because it's just going to shift the processor ID numbers by an additive constant. It doesn't really make any difference. All the processors are anyway independent. And so this is the best solution I can hope for for any program. However, the problem is while this is a max rank solution and the best solution you can hope for, depending on the program, it may or may not satisfy the data dependence constraints. Okay, so I just wanted to point out that these are the ideal, I mean, these are the max rank solutions. And if the program was embarrassingly parallel, then these solutions will satisfy my data dependence constraints. But if my program was not embarrassingly parallel, in other words, some iterations of the program had data dependencies with other iterations of the program, then this program does not, this solution does not satisfy the data dependence constraints. So we are interested really in the max rank solution, not just the absolute max rank solution, but the max rank solution that satisfies the data dependence constraints. So that's our constraint. You know, we want capital C1, small c1, capital C2, small c2, such that it is the max rank solution still, but a solution that max rank solution such that it also satisfies the data dependence constraints. So we need to put scaffold the data dependence constraints on our solution. And we have seen this before. If there are k statements s1, s2, s dot dot dot sk, we want to choose functions for each of those statements. Let's say capital C1, small c1, capital C2, small c2, dot dot dot capital Ck, small ck. These are each of them representing one mapping function such that each of them is of maximum rank such that the data dependence constraints are satisfied. So what do I mean by data dependence constraints are satisfied for every pair of statements? So it's like a pairwise check where the pair of statements may be the same statement. So it may be sa compared with sa itself. So it's order n squared. And so sa, let's say it's sa and sb and where sa and sb could be the same statement. Then for all ia belonging to z to the power da where da is the loopness depth of sa and ib belonging to z to the power db. So ia is a da size tuple and ib is a db size tuple. db is the depth of the loopness at the point where sb is present. And then if ia belongs to the iteration space of s1 and ib belongs to the iteration space of sb, ia belongs to the iteration space of sa and ib belongs to the iteration space of sb and there is a data dependency. So one of them is a right. Okay, so that's something I forgot to write. So let me just write it now. So one of them is a right and they access the same location. So fa ia plus small fa equals fb ib plus small fb. Then it must be true that ca ia plus small ca equals capital cb ib plus small cb. And in other words, they map to the same processor. And this is the full characterization of the problem of identifying the maximum rank affine partition, which is also going to give me the maximum possible synchronization free parallelism with affine mappings only. Okay, so let's look at an example to understand this formulation of the problem and the corresponding solution in more detail. So let's say this is a problem for i equals 1 to 100, j equals 1 to 100, xij equals xij plus yi minus 1j and yij equals yij plus xi comma j minus 1. So my first observation here is that there are six memory accesses in this program. xij read, xij write, yi minus 1j read, yij write, yij read, xij comma minus 1 read. Now, what are all the possible static accesses that could have a data dependency? Recall that we want to find all pairs of accesses. Each access, most of all, is treated as a statement, as a separate statement. And we are interested in finding those pair of statements or accesses which have a data dependency. So the first requirement is that one of them needs to be a write. So there are only two writes. So this xij and yij are the only two writes. So two writes and there are four reads. Okay, so basically, even there, when I write to x, then I only need to consider the reads of x or writes to x. So write to x can only interfere with a write or read to x. Similarly, a write to y can only interfere with a write or read to y. A write to x cannot interfere with a read or write to y, because x and y are completely different address spaces. So there are six statements and two writes. But if I look at what are all the possible pairs of statements which can potentially have a data dependency, it is xij with xij, both read and write. So notice that xij is occurring both in the write point and as a read point. And so xij with itself for the write and xij with the xij being read. So this with this and this with itself. Similarly, xij with xi, j minus one. So this can be an other pair of accesses that can have a data dependency. Notice that I am not really counting xij with yi minus one j or xij with yij because these are separate address spaces. Anything that's accessing x cannot be conflicting with anything that's accessing y. So xij can conflict with xi, j minus one, which is a read. So write to xij can conflict with read of xi, j minus one. Similarly, write to yij can conflict with either the read or the write to yij, similar to how we talked about xij. And finally, the write to yij can conflict with the read to yi minus one, j. So these are the four pairs of statements that we are interested in considering for formulating our space partitioning constraints that I showed you in the previous slide. So let's see what my space partitioning constraints are going to look like. First of all, notice that xij with itself will not have any space partitioning constraints because xij when I say xij write with itself, then one of notice that because it's a full rank access, i, j is a full rank access with every iteration, it's accessing a different element because for every different tuple i, j, xij is going to access a different element. So if I look at this write accesses conflicts with itself, different dynamic instances of xij write with itself, I'm going to find that the solution, there is no possible solution. There does not exist i, j and i prime, j prime such that i is not equal to i prime or j is not equal to j prime because after all they have to be different. Recall that that was one of our space partitioning constraints that if it's the same statement, then the two iteration vectors must be different. So and it should be true that they access the same location. In other words, i should be equal to i prime and j should be equal to j prime. Now notice that these are contradictory constraints. One is saying i should be equal to j, i equals i prime, j equals j prime. That's from coming from the fact that they should access the same location. And then we also have that either i should not be equal to i prime or j should not be equal to j prime. That's coming from the fact that because it's the same statement, there should be distinct accesses. So the way to say that is that the iteration vectors should be different in at least one dimension. And so from that we see that xij does not have any data dependence with itself when I talk about the write. Similarly, when I talk about the read, xij equals xij plus yi minus 1j. So here there's a reach to xij and these are two different statements. And now in these two cases, I do have a data dependency and the data dependency happens when it's the same iteration. We can also construct the data dependency constraints. They will look something like i should be equal to i prime, j should be equal to j prime because they should access the same location. And so basically whenever it's the same iteration, then there's a data dependence constraint. In fact, we can see that there is a static data dependence constraint as well because they're occurring whatever is the value computed is just being used here. And so even if I just did a scalar data dependence, not this affine polyhedral based analysis based data dependence, even then I would have been able to find out that xij and xi, there is a relation between the two. There's a data dependence between the two. Exactly the similar argument for yij right versus right and yij right versus read. These two are not going to give you any meaningful constraints except for the fact that this whole statement should be mapped together. So all these three axes, even because of the scalar dependencies, should be mapped together. So if whatever is the C capital function for this should be the same for this and should be the same for this. In other words, we should have just a single C comma C for this entire statement. And similarly, I can claim the same thing for the second statement as well. So those are the only constraints that come out of the relationships, the pairs xij and xij, yij and yij. So we're going to consider that and we're going to have only two sets of functions, two functions. One is C1 comma small c1 and one is capital C2 comma small c2. And then we are going to use the other two conflicting statements that have a data dependency to identify constraints on these two functions to find functions for each of the statement. So let's see. Once again, based on what we discussed in the previous slide, let's say that this whole statement is S1, because after all we have already discussed that each of these axes must have the identical mapping. And so we can just use one mapping for the entire C statement. And so I'm just using S1 for the entire statement. Recall that when we talked about this kind of analysis and fine partitioning analysis, we said that we're going to use three address code statements. We are using three address code statements, but after using the three address code statements and identifying the dependencies, data dependencies, we find that the entire C statement actually is going to have the same function. And so we are having one C statement as one unit in this example. We also simplify the discussion in this lecture. Similarly, for the second statement, the entire statement is considered a one unit. And let me call the first statement S1 and let me call the second statement S2. Let me denote S1 with a cross and S2 with a knot or a circle. And now because it's a 2D iteration space, I have the luxury of drawing it. And so here is the iteration space in a 2D graph, I on the X axis and J on the Y axis, I going from 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and so on, J going from 1, 2, 3, and so on. And for each iteration space, let's say this one, I have two statements that are executed. So at 1, 1, there is a cross and a zero. Similarly, at 1, 2, there is a cross and a zero. Similarly, at 2, 1, there is a cross and a zero and so on for I, J. All right, so that's my iteration space. And now I'm going to try and draw dependency edges. So recall that our dependency edges are coming because of Xij and Xij minus 1. That's one type of dependency. And then the other type of dependency is Yij and Yi minus 1, J. Now, when is Xij going to conflict with Xi, J minus 1? When, so we need basically two indices. One is I, J, and the other is I prime, J prime. And we need those indices such that I equals I prime and J equals J prime minus 1 for these two, right? If this is I prime, J prime, and this is I, J, then for them to conflict, it should be true that they access the same location. In other words, I should be equal to I prime and J should be equal to J prime minus 1. So for example, if I, J was 0, sorry, if I, J was 1, 1, then I prime, J prime would be, if I was 1, 1, then I prime, J prime would be 1, 2, all right? And so I can draw an edge from 1, 1 to 1, 2 for I, J, right? So when I say 1, 1, I'm really talking about I, J. So I can draw an edge from 1, 1 to 1, 2. And from what of 1, 1 to what of 1, 2, it's not just enough to say that, you know, I draw an edge from 1, 1 to 1, 2. S1 of 1, 1 to S2 of 1, 2. And notice that S1 is a cross and S2 is a circle. In other words, cross of 1, 1 to 0 of 1, 2, or not of 1, 2, a circle of 1, 2. And so this is the edge that I should have created, okay? So this is my dependency edge that I would create. Now, similarly, if I consider the pair yi, J and yi minus 1, J, I'll get I equals I prime and J equals J prime. I equals I prime minus 1 and J equals J prime for there to be a conflict. So if I, J is 1, 1, then I, J would be 2, 1. And 2, 1 is this one here. But it's the S2 of 1, 1 that has a conflict with S1 of 2, 1. And so the dependency that's going to be drawn is something like this. Now, recall that the ideal solution for this would have been that every cross and every knot is mapped to a separate processor. So each of these points that I've drawn in this grid could have been mapped to a separate processor. But because I'm drawing these red arrows, it has constrained that this knot and this x should be mapped to the same processor. And this is just for 1, 1, and I can just complete the grid. So let's look at this. So basically, what we have is a picture which draws an edge from S2 of 1, 1 to S1 of 2, 1. And S1 of 1, 1 to S2 of 1, 2. And I can just kind of expand this grid. And on this side, basically, I draw more edges from 2, 1 to 2, 2. Similarly, 1, 2 to 2, 2, 1, 3 to 2, 3, and so on. And similarly, these vertical edges from cross to 0. So I mean, just basically replicate this pattern that I have drawn between 1, 1 and its successors to other things in this particular column. And in fact, I can just extend this to the entire grid. And this would be my dependency graph. Now, once I look at this dependency graph, what do I see? I find that this particular, there are chains. So for example, S1 of 2, 1 and S2 of 1, 1 are chained and so on. And so this whole thing is basically a chain. And this chain is, let's say, different from this chain in the sense that they don't have any connections. These chains are basically not connected to other chains. And that's a good thing, because that means that this chain is independent of the other chains. And so each of these chains can be mapped to a separate processor without having any need for any synchronization. And that's what the parallelism is going to give us. So that's what our solution is going to be. Our solution should be such that it maps S1 and S2 using C1, small c1, capital C2, small c2, such that all these points in each of the chains are always mapped to the same location. And that should be true for all these chains. So how many chains are there? There are on the order of 100 chains, nearly 200 chains, because this is probably the longest chain, and then this and this and this, and similarly this and this and this. So there are some long, some very short chains, but a total of, let's say, around 200 chains. And each of these chains can be mapped to a separate processor. And mathematically, that basically means that C1, C1, C2, C2 should be chosen in such a way such that each of these chains basically, all the points in this chain basically are mapped to the same processor ID. So notice that each of these points basically represent an iteration space characterized by i, j. And so for all these i, j's, C should be such that it maps to the same PID, process ID. And we're going to discuss how we find the solution in my subsequent modules. But in this module, I'm just going to say, give you a solution. And intuitively, notice that these chains basically have a 45 degree angle. And so that's going to also reflect in our mapping. And so we can have a one-dimensional mapping for every statement. So P1, which is representing this processor for iteration i, j of S1 would be i minus j minus 1. So i minus j represents that it's a straight line with a 45 degree angle. And similarly, P2 would be i minus j. So basically, notice that S2, so we can just take an example. So let's say i, j was 1. So S1 of i, j equals 1 would map to 1 minus 1, 0, minus 1, minus 1. So S1 would map to processor ID minus 1. And S2 would map to processor ID 0 for i, j equals 1. So actually, the two statements on the same iteration, i, j equals 1, would map to different processors. But on the other hand, if I look at i, i equals 2 and j equals 1, so let me use a different color. So i equals 2 and j equals 1, then S1 would map to 0 and S2 would map to 1. And notice that S1 of 2, 1 is mapping to 0 and S2 of 1, 1 is also mapping to 0. And that's exactly the constraint that is being encoded by this particular edge here, and that's being satisfied by this solution. And you can check it for yourself that all these constraints, the entire chain that's going here, this solution for the mapping of S1 and S2, this satisfies the constraint that the entire chain here is going to map to the same P1, the same processor. So in other words, when I'm looking at a circle, I should look at P2. When I'm looking at a cross, then I should look at P1. And for every point that I look at it, whether it be a circle or a cross, I will find that they all evaluate to the same value, which in this case would be 0, actually. So this entire chain, if you evaluate P1 for 0, for not and P2 for cross, then you would find that this entire chain evaluates to 0. That basically means this entire chain is mapped to the same processor, processor ID 0. Finally, for this particular solution, what is our capital C comma small c? Capital C1 is 1 comma minus 1, because those are the multipliers of i and j respectively. And small c1 is minus 1, because that's the constant additive term for S1. And similarly, capital C2 is 1 comma minus 1 for the multiplicative constants. And small c2 is just 0, because there is no additive constant for P2. And so that is our space partitioning solution for the space partitioning constraints that we have set up for this particular example.
