Title: Compiler Design Module 121 : Composing Transfer Functions for Region based Analysis
Video ID: 40wv3twEhe0
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

Recall that for region-based analysis we have a bottom-up pass that composes multiple transfer functions into a single transfer function for the entire region. And so this is, you know, this is the topic of composing transfer functions and here are some, you know, potential graphs, for example, F1 could be composed with F2 in sequence to compute a summary function, I'm calling it F summary, or F1 and F2 could be composed in parallel, in which case there's a summary function for the entire thing, for the entire graph or the entire region and that's the summary function here. Or F could be, you know, the body of a loop and then there is a back edge and then we compute the summary of the entire loop, including the back edge. And so the summary functions for larger regions are based on the transfer functions of the smaller sub-regions and we have seen this in detail before. Now the summary functions further may involve sophisticated symbolic analysis, right? So summary functions could be either the fallback functions, the trivial summaries which are formed by the DFA fixed point iteration or it could involve more sophisticated symbolic analysis. Now the first thing I want to point out here is that the fallback or the trivial summary function can be described using three operators on the transfer functions. One is the composition operator, one is the meet operator and one is the closure operator on transfer functions and this is for reducible graphs. So the point I'm making is, recall that when we discuss a data flow analysis, we basically talk about composing transfer functions and how the family of transfer functions is closed under composition. We also talk about a meet operator and then we talk about how fixed point iteration can potentially have loops and so that's why we start from the top and get the most optimistic fixed point in our algorithm. Now in reducible graphs, all cycles are natural loops and so because they are reducible graphs, loops can be captured by this structure where there is a cycle and there is a loop body. There's a back edge and there's a loop body and so that is being captured by closure and so what I'm saying here is not very different, I'm just saying it in different words but it's not very different from what we have already discussed about data flow analysis and transfer functions that you can compose the transfer functions, they can be met and they need to have a closure operator. So what do I mean by closure? Well, what do I mean by composition? Composition is a series composition, F1 followed by F2. Meet is this if-then-else type of diamond shape where F1 result and F2 results need to be met and then closure is basically the task of applying F potentially infinite number of times to obtain a final value. Now, so by closure I mean I can apply F repeatedly one or more number of times and potentially unbounded number of times. Now, the important thing here, however, the important difference between what I have discussed earlier and what I'm discussing now is that I'm now trying to define composition, meet and closure on the transfer functions to obtain a new transfer function. So given two transfer functions, I would be able to obtain a summary transfer function based on one of these operators or a combination of one or more of these operators. For example, here, F summary is based on the composition of F1 and F2. Here, F summary is based on the meet of F1 and F2. And here, F summary is based on the closure of F1 and F2. Now, I'm going to say that in region-based analysis when we are computing the transfer functions of regions in a bottom-up pass, then I can use these operators. So if I'm able to define these operators, composition, meet and closure, then while computing the bottom-up pass where I'm trying to get a transfer function for every region, I can use these operators to be easily able to compute the transfer functions of the regions when I'm doing the bottom-up pass in my region-based analysis. In fact, it's not just limited to fallback transfer functions or fallback summary functions. It's also true for sophisticated summary functions many oftentimes, right? Not always, but oftentimes it is also possible to represent sophisticated symbolic analysis when we are doing the bottom-up analysis to summarize transfer functions of entire regions based on transfer functions of subregions. It is often possible to do this summarization based on these operators, composition, meet and closure, all right? So we're going to see an example in the future modules on how this kind of thing can happen and also in this particular module. So what is composition? If f1 is followed by f2, then f1 composed f2, right? So I need to define a composition operator which was going to say how f1 composes with f2, given two functions f1 and f2. Now, a trivial composition could be just compose the output of f1 and put it in f2 and that's a very valid way of doing the composition, but you could do more sophisticated compositions. Similarly, f1 meet f2, so you have two functions. I want to define what is the meet of f1 and f2 and I can basically use that to get the transfer function of this particular subgraph, all right? So I'm just showing you different subgraphs and how composition, meet and closure can get you the summary transfer functions for those subgraphs. Finally, this is the subgraph for which the closure operator which is represented using the asterisk operator as a superscript on f, the closure operator gives me the summary transfer function for this subgraph. And these are required because we need to compute, so we could have an arbitrary subgraph in my region, but I would be able to divide that arbitrary subgraph into compositions, meet and closure for a reducible subgraph, right? Any reducible subgraph can be divided into subparts which are either represented by the composition operator or by the parallel meet or the closure which is the baggage. Okay, so here is an example. Let me take the example of constant propagation and let's say I'm talking about composition here, right? So f1, f2 and I'm interested in the summary. Now let's say this is my program. The first block is x equals 2, the second block is y equals 3. Now f1 which is the transfer function of the first block is just whatever is in, just union that with x, 2 or x colon 2 which means x is going to have the constant value 2 and that's the constant propagation value and you just add that, union that with the set A and that's the transfer function. So I'm not deriding return, but this is a function that returns this value in union with x colon 2. So this is the transfer function f1. Similarly, this is the transfer function f2 for y equals 3 which is in union y colon 3. And now based on any two transfer functions I need to define a composition operator and in this case I define my composition operator for f1 and f2 to be just composed, whatever is being composed here plus whatever is being composed here and that's in union x colon 2, y colon 3. So x is given 2 and y is given 3. You know, said differently f1 composed f2 of x here and that's the general definition also, it's just f2 of f1 of x and if you just use this then you're going to get this particular answer for your composition operator. Now let's look at the meet operator for constant propagation. So let's say on one branch I have x equals 2, y equals 3 on the other branch I have y equals 2 and x equals 3 and so for the first branch I have f1 which just says in union x comma 2, y comma 3. I'm using comma here instead of colon which I was using in the previous slide, that's okay, I hope. And so in union x comma 2, y comma 3 is for f1 and similarly for f2 I have in union y comma 2, x comma 3. And now I want to define what is the meet of these two transfer functions and notice that this meet is not on values unlike a traditional DFA where I was defining meet on the values of the DFA. I was defining the meet operator on the set V. Here I'm defining the meet operator on the transfer functions and so I want to say what is f1 meet f2 and f1 meet f2 should give me a new transfer function. And so I say f1 meet f2 of n and in this case I just use a trivial definition which is f1 in meet of f2 in. Alright, and so in this case because it's constant propagation what is the meet operator? Because it's constant propagation the meet operator is intersection and f1 in meet of f2 in is just going to give me in back because there is nothing that is common between x comma 2, y comma 3 and y comma 2, x comma 3 and so this is just going to be in. Alright, now let's take another example where we are going to do the closure operator. Alright, so this is my sub graph and I have the transfer function f and let's say f has some body and the body let's say basically increments x by 1 and then there is a condition that says if x is not equal to n then repeat it or otherwise just return whatever is n. So I increment x by 1 so think about it, the graph looks something like this. It says if, alright let me just write the program it says if x is not equal to n, x equals x plus 1. So let's say this is my code for f and so the corresponding transfer function is if in x which is the, so in the case of available expressions the input is the map. So if the input map maps x to a value which is not equal to n, then I just increment x and so I am using this. x becomes in x plus 1 and I update this mapping so this is the updation on n. Alright, so I get a new map on in and I get a new map, this is my new map which has everything that in had plus this extra mapping replacing any previous mappings for x which has x getting in x plus 1. So whatever was in x plus 1 is basically the new mapping and if in x was not equal to n I just return the original mapping. And so this is how I will define the transfer function for a available expression pass. Now if I want to define the closure of this particular transfer function you know I have multiple options so when I am defining closures or meets I have some freedom in what I want to do. In this case I could do the fallback closure in which case I could just say oh if I see this and then I have to apply this multiple times that's almost like saying I don't really know what x is going to be after an arbitrary number of iterations of the loop or you know until the loop exits and so I am just going to say in updated with x to bottom. So this is basically just going to set x to bottom in in and return the corresponding map. So this is the fallback closure. Now I could have made this more precise if I wanted to have a symbolic analysis and that's what we really started as a motivation for region based analysis. I could do a more precise symbolic closure for f which is f star in which case I would update x to max of in x, n. So it's basically saying that look whatever was the input value of x before the first iteration of loop if that was less than n then I am going to come out with a value equal to n because I am going to keep incrementing until I reach n. But if it was greater than n then I am not going to enter the loop even once and so I am going to return that value in x. And so for doing this kind of analysis I would probably have a symbolic analysis and so that's how my closure would be defined in this case. And so this is my symbolic closure function for f and that just says that I return in updated such that x is now mapped to max of in x, n. Because this is where the value of actually having region based analysis for loop regions is helping out and giving you more precise answers than your fall back analysis which is the vanilla data flow analysis. And the important point I am making here is that I can encode this symbolic information or these symbolic operations by defining what the closure should be. So I would define how the given a function f, how the closure should be constructed. I would have some way of doing that and based on that I would be able to implement my symbolic analysis. Now let's take one last example of how we would do you know a composition of transfer function for another data flow analysis that has been expressed using the gen and kill states. And in this example I am using the example of reaching definitions. Recall that in reaching definitions we say you know transfer function of an input where input is the set of reaching definitions is nothing but the definitions that have been generated union in minus definitions that have been killed. So gen union in minus kill. And so for f1, for statement 1 I may have gen 1 union in minus kill 1 and for f2 I may have gen 2 union in minus kill 2. Now composition f1 composed with f2 is nothing but we have seen this before. It's a gen 2 union, gen 1 union in minus kill 1 minus kill 2 and we can even simplify this to basically bring this into a gen union in minus kill form as well. Similarly f1 meet f2. Recall that for reaching definitions the meet operator is union and that's just gen 1 union in minus kill 1 union gen 2 union in minus kill 2. So notice that I am basically defining the composition operator on transfer functions. Now I have defined the meet operator on the transfer functions and finally I need to define the closure operator on the transfer function. And so for any transfer function f1 which has gen 1 union in minus kill 1, the closure is also the same, gen 1 union in minus kill 1 and this can be, you know, this is true because if you notice reapplying f1 or any f to the output of the previous f or composing f with itself just gives me f and so any number of, any arbitrary number of applications of f, so f1 star is also going to give me the same f back. And so in this case also I have defined the composition operator, the meet operator and the closure operator on the transfer functions and based on this I can do my region based analysis. In particular I can do my bottom up pass in my region based analysis.
