Title: Compiler Design Module 91 : Introduction to DFA Framework
Video ID: TncFeaBTuR4
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

We have been looking at different types of dataflow analysis. For example, we looked at constant propagation, we looked at available expressions, we looked at reaching definitions. But we want to basically gradually build up a common framework to express these dataflow analysis. So if we look at forward dataflow analysis, then basically we have a statement S in our program, for all possible statements. Then just before the statement, we have a value which we denote as in S, and then just after the statement, we have a value which is called out S. These values drawn out from the domain of values for that particular dataflow analysis. For example, in the case of constant propagation, this value is going to be a set of constant mappings. For reaching definitions, it's going to be a set of definitions and so on. Then we have to specify a transfer function that transfers in into out. So the transfer function is specified as something that takes V and produces FV. And in this case, in S is supplied as argument in place of V and out S is basically updated using FV. The other part of dataflow analysis is the meet operator. And so in a forward dataflow analysis, if we have a statement S, then we express the in of S as a function of out of P, where P represents a predecessor of S. So P0, P1, dot, dot, dot, PN. So basically we know the out values of all these predecessors, then we can identify the in value of S using the meet operator. So that's the common pattern that we see in all forward dataflow analysis, including constant propagation and reaching definitions. But then there is a backward dataflow analysis, which is just the flip of this, where again, for every statement S, we had in S and out S, just like before, in S is just before the statement S and out S is just after the statement S. But the difference is now the transfer function is operating in the reverse direction. So it takes V and then produces FV just like before, but now we are going to substitute out S for V and update in S using FV. So the arrows of the transfer function have just changed and so FV is appearing in the place of in V, in S and V is appearing in the place of out S. And similarly, the meet operator is also kind of has a diverse direction. Here we want to specify the out of a statement. So let me call that statement P. So I want to specify out P in terms of in S0, in S1, dot, dot, dot, in SN. And notice that I'm using these kind of arrows point anywhere in the program. So they don't need to be strictly after the program point P. For example, if it was a loop, then S could actually be in earlier in the program order as well, right? So because there are cycles in the program control flow graphs. So in this case, we're going to specify out P as a function, which is specified using the meet operator of in S0, in S1 and in SN. So this is a nice diagram to basically contrast backward and forward data flow analysis. Everything else pretty much remains the same. It's just the direction of transfer function and the meet operator that changes between the two. The other thing that we learned was that it's not necessary to work at statement granularity or individual instruction granularity, but we can work at the granularity of basic blocks, for example. And so I'm just replaced in the slide S with B. And so now, when we have B here, then we talk about in B, which is just before the basic block and out V, which is just after the basic block. And the basic block would have multiple instructions. And then we would just define the transfer function in terms of the basic block and not necessarily in terms of individual instructions. And that can make my algorithm slightly faster because I'm doing batch processing. I can pre-compute these transfer functions. And then when I'm doing the fixed point iteration, I need to apply it only once for the entire basic block rather than having to apply it for individual statements. Similarly, in the meet operator, basically, I can reason about basic block and in of basic block. So within a basic block, maybe I don't really need to compute the values in the middle instructions of basic block. If we need to, then we can always propagate in B later on as a post-processing step into the intermediate program points of the basic block. But at the high level, we can just do in B in terms of out P0, out P1, dot dot out PN. And similarly, it's the opposite in the backward direction. Everything else remains the same. I've just replaced S with B everywhere, all right? And so the point here I'm making here with this slide is that you can often analyze at basic block granularity. Okay, so what is the algorithm? Recall that our algorithm is basically a fixed point iteration. So a fixed point iteration is supposed to compute a solution such that the DFA equations hold in the solution, right? So all the equations that we have that relate out to in, in to out across a statement between predecessors and successors should hold. And they should hold even in the presence of cycles. So I'm just drawing some different structures that are possible in the control flow graph. Here's a single basic block cycle. Here's multiple basic blocks that are basically having multiple cycles. And here is another kind of interesting pattern of cycle. So any pattern of the cycle should be possible to do with our data flow analysis algorithm. And I'm claiming that the fixed point iteration algorithm that we have discussed will be able to handle all such loop patterns. Okay, and we're going to see this in more formal detail later. The other common characteristic of all these data flow analysis is that there are partially ordered values. So it's not just a set of values that represents a domain, but also a partial order, right? Which is represented by the less than equal to operator, right? And one way to represent these ordering is by using a directed acyclic graph. For example, in this graph, there's an edge from A to B if and only if A is greater than equal to B, or in other words, B is less than equal to A, right? So example, this is basically saying V2 is less than equal to V1, V3 is less than equal to V1, but V2 and V3 really have no comparison with themselves. So they're not comparable. That's why it's called a partial order as opposed to a total order. Okay, so the other common part here is that there is usually one value which is greater than equal to all other values in the domain, and there is one value which is less than equal to all other values in the domain. So the former is called the top value and represented by this symbol which looks like a T, and the second one, which is less than equal to all other values, is also called bottom, which looks like the inverted symbol T. So here's what a typical data flow analysis fixed-point iteration looks like, and I'm using the example of a constant propagation data flow analysis. So in this, we basically say out of entry equals empty set. So the input to this algorithm is a control flow graph which can be represented as a set of nodes N, a set of edges E, a special node which is the entry node, and a special node which is the exit node. I'm assuming that there's only one entry and one exit. If there are multiple exits, then you can just join them into a single exit using a no-op edge, and hopefully the program only has a single entry. If it has multiple entries, once again, you would basically have a single entry that just has no-ops to all the other entries. But typically, we talk about programs that have a single entry because we are basically, for example, analyzing the body of a function or a method. Okay, so when we are talking about constant propagation, we basically, the first thing we do is we say out entry equals empty set. And then we say for each other basic block, which is not entry, other than entry, we say out B equals X comma top for all X. So top is supposed to be the top value. And this is optimistically, we have set everything to the top value which is saying that, okay, let's just assume that everything is top. It's not reached yet. Except for the entry, everything else has not been reached. Recall that when we talked about constant propagation, the top value was basically signifying that we haven't reached this program point yet. And then we basically have our fixed point iteration that says while changes in any out occur. Any out means any out of any basic block occur. For each basic block B, we say in B equals intersection over all the out Ps where P is a predecessor of B, right? So for all predecessors P of B, we intersect over out Ps to get in B. So that's our meat operator. And then we apply the transfer function of B to in B that has just been computed to obtain out B, all right? And so this goes on and this is our fixed point iteration. So if you just go back to our discussion on constant propagation or reaching the definitions, all our algorithms are basically having this form. The only small changes that I've made is that I'm using now a basic block granularity instead of a statement granularity. Also, I have decided an order. I'm first doing meat and then I'm doing transfer function. And notice that with every iteration, I'm basically being able to update the out of a particular B. So this particular first phase of the data flow analysis algorithm is the initialization phase where we are setting the entry value to the empty set and all other values to the top value, X comma top. And then this is the fixed point iteration. Now, I want to point out that the entry value is not the top value, right? Actually, what is the empty set? It's actually the bottom value when we talk about constant propagation because empty set basically indicates that all variables are basically not a constant, basically bottom value, right? So empty set is the bottom value that we are setting for entry. And for everything else, we are setting it to top. And this basically signifies that in the beginning, we just reached the entry, but we haven't really reached any other point in the program. And moreover, at the entry, we know that there are no constant relationships because conservatively we assume that at the entry, we don't really have any constant relationships known. Okay, so this condition that out entry is empty set is also called the boundary condition because it's a condition at the boundary just before we start and kind of propagate this boundary condition all through our program. And this value here is actually our top value, all right? So this is the top value for our constant propagation algorithm. When we discussed constant propagation in the context of the single variable, the top value basically meant the program hasn't point hasn't been reached. When we talk about constant propagation in the context of multiple variables, then this is basically saying that for all possible variables that we know, the program point hasn't been reached. So it's now become a set of X comma top mappings and that becomes our new top value in this new representation of the constant propagation DFA. And this intersection here is our meet operator because in constant propagation, we want that it should be a constant on all possible program parts. And the FB here is our transfer function. And so all dataflow analysis algorithms basically have same structure, just that the boundary condition may be different, the top value may be different, the meet operator may be different and the transfer function may be different. So moreover, if I just, this was only for a forward dataflow analysis. So in the forward dataflow analysis, we are assuming that the boundary condition has the entry and the propagation is happening in a certain way. The meet is happening in a certain way because for example, the meet is happening for out of the predecessor blocks with the in of the current block. Whereas if the backward dataflow analysis, it's the opposite. So I can just rewrite this. I can just kind of annotate some parts. For example, instead of initializing out of entry as my boundary condition, I can initialize in of exit as my boundary condition for a backward dataflow analysis. So I just added backward slash forward in this slide and it comes in for backward, out for forward, exit for backward, entry for forward. And then the boundary condition is of course a parameter depends on what the dataflow analysis is. Similarly, for each basic block, other than exit for backward, entry for forward, once again, in for backward, out for forward, B equals whatever is the top value for that particular dataflow analysis. And then while changes in any, for the backward case, we were looking at in and for forward case, we are looking at out, right? So once again, while changes in any in slash out occur for each basic block B. Now in the case of backward, we first update out using out of B using the backward dataflow analysis, which means using the values at in of the successors. So for backward, we're going to say in of successors, whereas for forward, we're going to say out of predecessors. And similarly, in the transfer function, we're going to update in using FB, applied on outs of the successors. For forward, we update out using FB by applying FB on the ins of the predecessors. So there's a very nice isomorphism between what we are doing in a forward dataflow analysis and a backward dataflow analysis. And that can be just expressed by replacing in by out, or out by in, and in by out, and entry by exit, and so on. Okay, so we are kind of building towards a common framework for a dataflow analysis, and that includes both forward and backward dataflow analysis. So now let's summarize our constant propagation algorithm. So we're going to have a few different parameters. So it's the same framework, just a few different parameters. The first parameter is what is the domain of values? So for constant propagation, the domain of values is sets of constant definitions. So for example, X is mapped to three, Y is mapped to four, Z is mapped to bottom, but bottom ones we are not going to put in the set, they're just going to be removed from the set, so Z is not going to have a mapping. Another set could be everything is mapped to top, so things like that. The direction is another parameter of my dataflow analysis, because depending on the direction, we are going to use the in or the out, and similarly boundary conditions and stuff, entry or exit and things like that. So the direction for the constant propagation algorithm, for example, is forward. Then we have to specify the transfer function, which is going to say out B equals FB in B, because it's a forward dataflow analysis, that's what the structure of the transfer function is going to be. It's going to express out of a basic block in terms of in of a basic block. For example, in the case of constant propagation, one way to represent the transfer function is, it's a function that takes X, so lambda X is representing that function that takes X, and then returns gen B union X minus kill B. So things that are generated by the basic block, and things that are propagated by the basic block. We have looked at the gen and kill functions. Then we have to specify a meet operator, which is another parameter of the DFA. In this case, it's a set intersection operator. And finally, one parameter is, what is the boundary condition? And in the case of constant propagation, the boundary condition is out of entry equals the empty set or five. Now, I could have started with a different boundary condition. For example, somehow if I know that when I come to this function at the very beginning, I already know that X is definitely going to be three, then I could have initialized the boundary condition with a singleton element X comma three, right? But different data flow analysis can have different boundary conditions. And the boundary condition has nothing to do with what is the meet operator typically, right? I mean, it's just things like, what do I know at the beginning of starting to run the data flow analysis? And that's the boundary condition. In the case of a forward data flow analysis, this knowledge is typically at the entry of the function. In the case of backward data flow analysis, this knowledge is typically at the exit of the function, but even that is not necessary. It's possible that boundary conditions are available in the middle of the program as well.
