Title: Compiler Design Module 181 : Sequencing with If Then Else
Video ID: lomyduiygyI
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

Just like we looked at sequencing for the assignment operator, let's look at the conditional operator once again. Recall that a conditional operator in our toy imperative language is basically an if-then-else operator. If some Boolean expression B on the program state, which is represented with x and dot, dot, dot, then do something, let's say change the state with some assignment statements, say x colon equals f, or else x colon equals g. And I want to emphasize that this body need not be a single statement, it could be a sequence of multiple statements, multiple assignment statements or nested ifs, et cetera, but we can just extract it as a single assignment for now, and we can have a general set of rules to basically inductively apply to get the final kind of verification conditions. The whole trouble that we are interested in proving is basically that if precondition p holds at the beginning of the program and the program is executed, then at the end of the program, q holds. And both p and q are predicates, which are basically Boolean functions on the machine state, which is represented with x and dot, dot, dot. All right, so we've already seen how to approach this proof. We're basically interested in finding intermediate predicates, p1 at the start of the den body, p2 at the end of the den body, p3 at the start of the else body, p4 at the end of the else body, such that, and any such predicates are okay, as long as they satisfy these conditions in green. The conditions are that p and b should imply p1. Similarly, p and not b should imply p3. Similarly, this whole triple should be true, which means p1, if p1 holds the beginning of this body, then p2 should hold at the end of it. So, because in this case, it's a single assignment, I can use the encoding for my assignment operator and say p1 should imply p2, such that all the x's have been replaced with f in p2. Similarly, p3 should imply p4, such that all the x's in p4 have been replaced with g. And finally, both p2 and p4 should imply q. The succinct way to write that is that p2 or p4 should imply q. This basically means that individually p2 should imply q and p4 should also imply q. Now, this is one way to kind of discharge this whole triple proof obligation. And these five different conditions form our verification conditions. But of course, the problem is how do I find out what is p1, p2, p3, p4? Once again, I want to emphasize that any such values of p1, p2, p3, p4 that satisfy these constraints are good enough. If you are able to find any such p1, p2, p3, p4, we have completed the end-to-end proof. So now, today in this module, I'm going to show you a strategy on identifying what should be the appropriate p1, p2, p3, p4. This is just one such strategy, which is a general strategy which would work for any such kind of proof obligations with a conditional operator. So the first thing that I'm going to use is I'm going to say p2 and p4 are the same as q. So given q, we already given p and q. So for p2 and p4, I just use q. And that immediately gets rid of the last proof obligation which said p2 or p4 should imply q because now this just translates to q or q should imply q, which is a tautology. And so we can get rid of it. So we just choose p2 to be q and p4 to be q. And so in this code, I've also replaced p4 with q and p2 with q. The second thing is I just choose, I mean, this is something that we have already seen when we are talking about sequencing or assignment operators. I choose p3 to be the weakest precondition of q across this statement. So p3 is basically q where all the x's have been replaced with g, right? And so that basically, if I look at my proof obligation, the verification condition, it was that p3 should imply q where all x's have been replaced with g. Now, if I just use p3 to be the same thing as the RHS of this proof obligation, then basically this again becomes a tautology and I can cross this out. And so basically what I'm doing is whatever was the proof obligation that was required, I'm just kind of taking its pre-image and saying, oh, what is the weakest condition that should be true here which kind of satisfies my required verification condition. And that in this case is basically q such that all the x's have been replaced with g. Similarly, I can replace p1 with q, which is the post condition for the then body with all the x's replaced with f. This is just identical to the case for else. Earlier we talked about, in the previous slide I talked about else. The else code where I was replacing p3 with q where x's have been replaced with g. Here I'm replacing p1 with q where x's have been replaced with f. And so with that, my new kind of program, the code looks like the following. Now given concrete expressions to p1, p2, p3, p4, it's in there no longer non-deterministic. I don't have to find some p1, p2, p3, p4. In fact, I have a strategy to identify what the p1, p2, p3, p4 should be. For example, p1 is this expression, p2 is this expression, p3 is this expression, and p4 is this expression. And we've already shown that with these choices, the last three verification conditions just become tautologies, and we don't need to do anything for them. It's only the first two verification conditions that remain to be proven, which is p and b imply q, imply this p1, which is q, where all x's have been replaced with f, and p and not b, which is this else branch, imply q where all x's have been replaced with g. And so I've reduced the proof of code from finding, from having to find some p1, p2, p3, p4 that satisfy the five verification conditions to just discharging these two verification conditions because I've chosen my p1, p2, p3, p4, and now I have a strategy to choose my p1, p2, p3, and p4. Finally, I'd like to point out that the combination of these two proof obligations can be actually expressed as a single proof obligation which says that p implies this whole expression, this whole expression here, which basically says if b is true, then q, then this expression is true, which is actually p1, else this expression is true, which is actually p3, right? And so these two are actually equivalent. If this, which means the right-hand side is true, then the left-hand side, both of these are going to evaluate it true and vice versa.
