Title: Compiler Design Module 138 : Array Data Dependencies
Video ID: Rxlb1p2s_Z4
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

When we talk about compiler transformations, one of the first things we talk about is data dependence, because you cannot move statements across each other if they were, they had data dependencies with each other. So in this case also, and when you're talking about polyhedral transformations, we want to worry about data dependencies. In this particular case, we call them array data dependencies. So there are three types of dependencies, just like any other kind of data dependency, that you may have studied. Read-after-write, also called R-A-W or raw, also called true dependence. Write-after-read, W-A-R or war, also called anti-dependence, and write-after-write, W-A-W, war, also called output dependence. So I'm just going to call them raw, war, and war, and these are three different types of dependencies. Why do we have a read-after-write dependency? Because if somebody is writing, and then somebody is reading from that same location, then you cannot reorder between the two, because then the value that is read in the second statement would be incorrect. It would be the old value. Similarly, write-after-read, if you do a read and then you do a write, you cannot reorder the write before the read, because then what you will be reading in the first instruction would be wrong, because you would have written, or clobbered the value, and then you're reading. So you cannot reorder across a write followed by a read. And similarly, you cannot reorder across a write followed by a write, because then the final output state of your machine state would be different, because earlier you had the second write clobbering the first write, but if you reorder, you'll have the first write clobbering the second write, and so the final machine state would be different. So these are three different types of dependencies, are raw, war, and war. Here is an example to understand these in more detail. So I have A two into I plus one equals zero, and A of two into I equals one. So here there are two writes. So the only dependency that can happen is potentially write after write. I'm only considering array dependencies here. I'm not worried about dependencies across variables like I and N and things like that. I'm only interested in dependencies across memory locations that belong to the array A. And then in this case, both the memory locations are being written to. And my question is, is there a dependency between the first write, which is to A of two into I plus one, and is there a dependent with the second one, second statement, which is A of two into I. And the answer here is that, notice that the first statement is only writing to the odd elements in A. But it's two into I plus one, so it can only be, let's say if I is zero, then this becomes one, three, five, seven for I equals one, two, three, four, and so on, respectively. And similarly, the second statement is only writing to even elements. For example, it's writing to zero, two, four, six, eight. And so the set of memory locations that the two statements, that's two static accesses, are writing to are disjoint. And so I'm going to claim that they don't have a data dependency between them. So in other words, there is no data dependency between the first statement and the second statement because there is no instance of the first statement's execution that accesses the same location, or writes to the same location as any instance of the second access, which is A of two into I, because the first access only writes to odd locations, and the second access only writes to even location. And so there is no overlap between the two sets of locations. And so because there's no data dependence, for example, the compiler is free to do transformations like the one shown here. This transformation is also called loop vision. Here I create, I split the loop into two loops for I equal, in the first loop, I just write the first statement. In the second loop, I have only the second statement. Depending on how you want to look at it, I can also think of, I can also try to analyze this loop and say what is this program, this transform program, and say is there a dependency between this statement and this statement? No, is there a dependency between A two into I plus one equals zero, and A of two into J equals one? These are two memory accesses. Is there an array dependence between the two? And the answer is again no. Once again, because of the same reason, one is writing only to odd locations, the other is writing to the even location. And so in a different setting, maybe you want to transform it back to the original, to the first program that I had shown earlier. And this transformation in the reverse direction would be called loop fusion. Okay? But the point is that I could do either loop fission, splitting into multiple loops or do fusion, merging into a single loop, only because I was sure that there's no data dependency between the two static accesses. And how am I basically deciding whether there's a data dependence between the two static accesses? That there is no dynamic instance of either access that accesses the same location. And that's true in this particular example. Now let's look at another example. And in this example, we have a two depth loop nest for I equals zero, I is less than N, I plus plus, J equals zero, J is less than N, J plus plus, A I comma two star I equals zero, and A I plus J comma two star I plus J plus one equals one. And once again, with the same argument that I had in my previous slide, I'm claiming that there is no data dependence between the first access here and between the second access here. Once again, because the second dimension of the access is always even for the first access, it's always two into I, and I is an integer, so two into I is always going to be an even number. Whereas it's always odd in the second access, it's two star I plus J plus one, and that's one added to an even number, so that's guaranteed to be odd. And so once again, I can reason that these two are disjoint. The sets of locations accessed by these two accesses, static accesses is disjoint, and so there is no data dependence, and once again, I'm free to do my loop fusion or fission in this case as the compiler optimization demands. All right, but let's look at another example. In this case, I have the same program that I had earlier, but I just changed the second access to I plus J comma I plus three into J plus one. So now I plus three into J plus one is no longer guaranteed to be odd, right? Unlike my previous example. And now I claim that there is a data dependence from between AI comma two star I, and I plus J comma I plus three star J plus one. And how do I figure out what is the data dependence? Well, I basically figure out what are the, if I look at all the locations that are accessed by the first statement, and I look at all the accesses that are made by the second statement, all the locations that are accessed by the second statement, and I take their intersection, then basically if that intersection is non-empty, then I basically say that there is a data dependency. In this case, these both are rights, and so it's a right after right data dependency. Now here are some examples. Then I comma J is one comma zero for the first statement. The first statement would be accessing one comma, the location one comma zero. And also if the second statement, also if the iteration, the point in the iteration space is one comma zero, then the second statement would also be accessing one comma one plus three into J plus one, and that's not zero, okay? So this is actually a wrong one. Let me just cut this out. Oh, sorry. This is fine. Let me just bring this back. So the first one is going to access I one comma two, right? For iteration point one comma zero, I comma J is one comma zero. So the access that is made is I comma two into I, which is one comma two. And the second one is also at one comma zero going to make an access to one comma two, because I plus J is one, and I plus three into J plus one is two for I comma J equals one comma zero. But in this case, this just happens to be an example where it's the same iteration point, one comma zero for both statements, but that's not necessary. Recall that we're just taking the list of locations accessed across all possible iteration points. And so for example, any point which has three for I and anything for J, so for example, it could be three comma zero or three comma one or three comma two, that has a conflict or a data dependence with iteration point two comma one for the second statement. So for example, two comma one for the second statement is going to access three comma six. And that's exactly what three comma star, three comma anything for J is going to access for the first statement. So three comma star versus two comma one have data dependencies. So notice that the iteration points can be different for the two statements for them to be called data dependent. And similarly, here's another example, five comma star versus three comma two for the second statement. Here's another example. In this case, the two statements need not be part of the same depth of the loop nest. In fact, they can belong to completely different loop nest as well. And still we should be able to talk about the data dependencies between them. In this case, A I comma two star I is in the outer loop and the A I plus J comma I plus four J plus one is in the inner loop. And once again, there is a walk dependence for one comma zero for the first statement and one comma zero for the second statement. Actually, I could have just said one versus one comma zero because there's no J for the first statement, it's only I because it's in the outer loop. Similarly, I don't need to know when I equals four and I comma for the first statement and then I comma J equals three comma one for the second statement, I have a conflict, I have a data dependence and it's a walk data dependence. And so there's a data dependence between the static accesses as well. So whenever there is a data dependence between the static accesses for our compiler, it basically means I cannot reorder these two statements with respect to each other. For example, I can't just move, I can't just reorder these two statements. For example, I can't move A I comma two star I after this particular loop or I cannot perform some kind of loop vision or anything like that. Okay, so now we have some context of what do I mean by array data dependencies across static array accesses. To define it more formally, a static access depends on an other static access as long as there exists even one dynamic instance of the first access that depends on some dynamic instance of the second access. So they do not need to be the same dynamic instance. Some dynamic instance of the first access has a dependency on some dynamic instance of the second access, then we say that the static accesses depend on each other. What do I mean by dependence here? When does one dynamic instance depend on another dynamic instance? Well, when they access the same memory location and when one of them is a right. So raw, war or war, notice that all these cases are cases of dependence and where one of them is a right. So to define it more formally using our mathematical notation, let there be two static accesses, capital F, small f, capital B, small b. This is how we have been talking about array accesses by a given access, by a given static access. Capital F is the coefficient matrix, small f is the offset for the memory address. Capital B and small b define the iteration space for that particular access, static access in a D depth loop nest. And similarly, and notice that D depth loop nest basically tells you what is the dimension of the iteration space in capital B. Similarly, capital F prime, small f prime, capital B prime, small b prime in a D prime depth loop nest. So even the dimensions of capital B and small b, capital B and D prime do not need to be the same. Dimensions of capital F and f prime do not need to be the same. We don't really care what the dimensions are. These are two completely different accesses. They could be in different loop nest. They could be at different depths of the same loop nest. We don't know, we don't care. We could still talk about their data dependence, the data dependence of these static accesses. If first of all, at least one of them needs to be right. If both of them are reads, then there's no data dependence. At least one of them is right. And there exists some iterations vector I belongs to a D-tuple of integers, Z to the power D. And some integer vector I prime that belongs to a D prime tuple of integers, Z to the power D prime, such that I belongs to the iteration space of the first statement, first access. So in other words, B I plus B is greater than equals zero. I prime belongs to the iteration space of the second statement. In other words, B prime I prime plus B prime is greater than equals zero. And the two accesses for I and I prime are actually accessing the same memory location. In other words, capital F I plus small f equals capital F prime I prime plus small f prime. So this is our mathematical representation of saying that there is a data dependence between two static accesses if there exists a dynamic instance, which accesses the same location for some dynamic instance of the first access and some dynamic instance of second access that happen to access the same memory location. And at least one of those accesses is right. So let's apply this to some of the examples that we have looked at. So let's say I have A I comma two star I equals zero and I plus J comma I plus two into J plus one equals zero. In this case, the capital F for the first access is just, there's only one iteration variable here, right? And for the first access, which is I and so capital F is one, two and small f is zero, right? Because I comma two I, so the multipliers for the first dimension is one, the second dimension is zero, two and then the offset is just zero because there's no additive constant. So that's for the first access. For the second access, it's I plus J comma I plus two star J plus one. So capital F prime becomes one, one for I plus J and one, two for I plus two star J and then smaller becomes zero, one because there's no offset in the first dimension and there is offset of one for the second dimension. And now I can basically solve these equations and say, okay, what is iteration space for the outer loop? So I lies between zero and N, N excluded and what is the iteration space for the inner statement which can also be expressed using capital V prime and small v prime. And now we can solve these equations to basically figure out whether there's a data dependence or not. Dependencies across, so dependencies, I mean, sometimes we are also interested in figuring out whether they are dependent. So in previous examples that we've been using, we have been talking about dependencies across two different static accesses. But it is sometimes also meaningful to talk about dependencies across different dynamic instances of the same static access. For example, I have the static access A I plus J, I plus two star J plus one. Are there dependencies across dynamic instances of the same access? And so in this case, all I need to do is I use the same set of equations but I basically use capital F prime to be the same as capital F and small f prime to be the same as small f, capital V prime to be same as capital B and small v prime to be the same as small v. So it's like, is there any instance of the same statement that has a dependency on itself? And sometimes you may want to know this because if there is no dependency, then I can kind of split the iteration space without worrying about it and reorder the iteration space without worrying about things. But if there is a dependence, then I'll have to be more careful. And so this is the way to basically, I mean, the same set of equations can be used to also identify whether different dynamic instances of the same access, static access, could potentially have data dependencies. There is one subtle point here. When we are solving these equations, we are only interested in those values of I and I prime, if they exist, where I is not equal to I prime because one trivial solution to this set of equations is when I equals I prime, where everything is the same, it's the same access, same statement. And we are ready, if it's the same statement, we are not interested in the same point in the iteration space. We are interested in points that are different in the iteration space. So for this particular case, when we are looking at the same static access, then we add an additional constraint, I is not equal to I prime. Recall that when we are talking about different accesses, we don't add this constraint because even if it's the same iteration space point for which the two accesses have a data dependency, we are interested in that data dependency. That means we can't reorder those two statements. But when we are talking about the same static access, we are looking at different points in the iteration space for them to have a data dependency. Okay, here is some examples. So let's say I have for I equals one to 10, ZI equals ZI minus one. So is there a data dependency between ZI and ZI minus one? And the answer can be found by formulating the equations for if I look at my iteration space using capital B and small b, it's a scalar so I'm just writing it as a single equation, single inequality. One is less than equal to I is less than equal to 10. Similarly, one is less than equal to I prime is less than equal to 10, where I is the iteration variable of ZI and I prime is the iteration instance variable for ZI minus one. And from this, and then I want to say that capital F plus small f, capital F I plus small f equals capital F prime, I prime plus small f prime and capital F here is just one and small f is zero for the first axis, capital F prime is one and small f prime is minus one. And so that basically gives me I equals I prime minus one or I've written it in the other way, it should have probably, I mean, the way I'm talking is it should have been I equals I prime minus one. And now basically the answer is does there exist a solution to this system of equations? The answer is yes. For example, if I prime equals two, I equals one, then it satisfies one comma two, basically two comma one, one comma two basically satisfies all these equations. And so there is a data dependency between these two array axes, these two static axes. Notice that even though I'm writing this as one statement, I use the word access and statement interchangeably, it's also always possible to write this as two different statements. And I would say T equals Z I minus one, and then Z I equals T. And so these are two different statements or two different accesses in that sense. Okay, so for example, I comma I prime is two, one, three, two, and so on. Okay, now what about Z I with itself? Are there data dependencies of Z I with itself? So I will have a system of equation says, I is between one and 10, I prime is between one and 10, I equals I prime, because that's what, I mean, for there to be a data dependency, I need to have capital F I plus small f equals capital F prime I prime plus small f prime. But F prime and small f prime are the same as capital F and smaller because we're doing dynamic instances of same access. So that basically means, F I plus F equals F I prime plus F, capital F is just one, small f is zero. So that just gives me I equals I prime. And then recall that when we are talking about the same access, and we add an additional constraint which says, I should not be equal to I prime. And now if I look at this system of equations, there is no solution to this system of equations because we have contradictory conditions. One requires that I should be equal to I prime, another requires I should not be equal to I prime. And so there are no data dependencies between Z I with itself. Here is another example. Let's say instead of Z I, this was Z zero, just to make things clearer. Once again, my iteration space remains unchanged, I is between zero and 10, I prime is one and 10, I prime is also between one and 10. But now F I plus F equals F, F I prime plus F becomes zero equals zero because in this case F is zero, capital F is zero and small f is also zero. And so we get zero equals zero and we have the additional constraint just like before, I is not equal to I prime. Is there a solution to this system of equations? The answer is yes. In fact, one comma two, one comma three, one comma four, two comma three, two comma four, three comma four. In fact, all possible pairs of I comma I prime that are satisfied by the iteration space constraints, which is I is less than, I is between one and 10 and I prime is between one and 10 are basically valid. And so indeed there is a data dependence between Z zero and itself, between dynamic instances of Z zero and itself. And because it says right in this case, so Z zero is going to be, it is going to be a right after right dependency. Now I could have done the same thing on the other side. For example, it says Z I equals Z zero. And in this case also, I mean the equations just look exactly the same. However, there is no data dependence in this case. There is no data dependence because it's only reads to Z zero and recall one of our conditions for there to be a data dependence between one statement and the other. The statements could also be the same is that at least one of them should be a right. So between Z zero and Z zero dynamic instances, there is no data dependence, only reuse. So we already talked about reuse and we know that there's reuse because it's the same location that's being accessed. There is self temporal reuse in this case, but there is no data dependence.
