Title: Compiler Design Module 183 : While Loop Verification Condition
Video ID: pjHEnzNVxQY
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

So, we've looked at different constructs in an imperative programming language. For example, we looked at the assignment operator and we looked at the if-then-else constructor for a statement. Our next discussion is about the while constructor or the loop constructor found in a typical high-level programming language. So, here is the syntax of a while loop in our language while some Boolean condition b which is an expression that's a function of the machine state which involves let's say variable x and others and then you know you have some body and we know the meaning of a while loop. It basically when it first enters reaches this point, it basically checks b. If b is false, it doesn't even enter the while loop even once. If b is true, then it executes the body and again goes back to check the condition Boolean condition and it keeps repeating this loop until the Boolean condition evaluates to true. If the Boolean condition evaluates to false at any point, it exits and reaches the end of the loop. The whole triple that we are interested in proving is that if precondition p holds at the beginning of this loop, then postcondition q holds at the end of the loop. Both p and q are Boolean predicates which are expressions or functions on the current machine state which is represented with x dot dot dot. So, how do I go about discharging such a proof obligation and just like we've been doing all through, we're going to divide the program into smaller snippets and try to kind of reduce our proof a single proof step make our single proof step smaller and the way to do that is basically identify some Boolean predicates p1 and p2 at the beginning of the loop body and at the end of the loop body respectively and now we can basically identify what should be the verification conditions such that the end to end proof obligation can be proven. Notice that p1 and p2 are we don't know what p1 and p2 would be but let's say somebody gave us some p1 and p2 which satisfies the verification conditions that I'm going to discuss next then any such p1 and p2 that satisfy the verification conditions are good enough to complete this end to end proof. If we can find no such p1 and p2 then basically it means that this we were not able to discharge this proof obligation. Okay, so in this module I'm not going to discuss how to identify these p1 and p2 but I'm just going to assume that these p1 and p2 are coming to us through some oracle and once the p1 and p2 are given to us what should be the verification conditions that we should check to add it to basically be able to decide whether this proof obligation evaluates to true or not. So the first proof obligation here is that if I start with p at the beginning of the program and if the Boolean condition evaluates to true then I enter then I'm just at the beginning of the loop body and at that point p1 should hold. So the corresponding encoding of that is p and b implies p1 where p, b and p1 are Boolean predicates on the current machine state which are functions of the current machine state and this forms a verification condition 1. I've written it in this logical form I could have even written this proof obligation in a whole triple form where I would have said that if p holds here then for this segment of the program to execute and the control reaches here then p1 must hold and the corresponding logical encoding for that would be this. Alright similarly the second proof condition is when b is false b value is to false so if I start from the beginning of the program and b value is to false then I straight away go to the end of the loop and in which case I'm going to end up with a proof obligation which says if p is true and not b which in b is false then q is true. So that basically is the second verification condition that we need to verify to be able to discharge this to end-to-end proof obligation. The third verification condition basically relates p1 and p2 across the body of the loop. Now I haven't shown the body of the loop I just used dot dot dot to denote the body of the loop but in general the body of the loop could be made up of assignment operators or maybe nested loops. Irrespective you know we can basically let's say the body of the loop was alpha then this whole thing here basically represents a whole triple which basically says that if I start with p1 and execute alpha then I end up with p2 to be true and that's a whole triple and that whole triple will form our VC3. For example if alpha was a single assignment statement then we can we know what the encoding of this whole triple should be it's basically p1 implies p2's there within p2 all the x's have been replaced with the RHS of that particular assignment. The fourth verification condition is basically going to check going to relate p2 and p1 on the backward edge on the loop edge. So the previous verification condition that was VC3 was basically talking about the condition from p1 to p2 VC4 is going to talk about p2 and back to p1 and notice that from p2 I go back to p1 only if I b evaluates to true so that's basically our fourth verification condition which says if p2 is true and b evaluates to true then p1 must be true and so that forms our fourth verification condition. The fifth verification condition is basically for the other case where b was false so if p2 is true and b evaluates to false then I come all the way to the end of the loop and so that's our fifth verification condition which says p2 and not v implies q where p2 b and q are Boolean functions Boolean valued functions on the machine state. So that's our VC5 and those are the five verification conditions that I need to discharge to be able to complete the proof from p2q. Once again I don't in this kind of proof I have assumed that somehow somebody has given me the p1 and p2 which satisfy all these five verification conditions. If I am able to find any such p1 and p2 which satisfy all these five verification conditions then I have completed my proof and we are assuming so far that this p1 and p2 are coming to us from an oracle. How we get this p1 and p2 we're going to discuss later. Recall that when we talked about assignment or sequencing or even if then else we followed the same strategy. We first broke them down and said some oracle is giving us the intermediate predicates. We don't know how they are coming and then we devised a strategy to identify what the intermediate predicates should be. We're going to do a similar thing for the loops as well except unlike the straight line unlike the acyclic code examples which were if then else an assignment where there was a definite strategy where we will always determine what p1 and p2 should be. The problem becomes harder in the presence of loops as we're going to discuss later. Alright so let me go through an example to show this algorithm in action which is you know let's say I have a loop I have a program with a loop in this case I have a very simple loop which says while ix is not equal to zero x is assigned x minus one so you just decrement keep decrementing x until it becomes zero and the whole triple I want to prove is that if I start with some x which was greater than equal to zero which is non which means x was non-negative then I end up with some x which is definitely zero and how do I kind of show that this this proof obligate this whole triple actually evaluates it true. First of all I want you to convince yourself that this whole triple evaluates it true indeed if you start with something which was non-negative and you execute this loop then you're going to keep decrementing it until it reaches zero and by the time you exit you're going to end up you're going to be in a state where x equals zero. So the first step is to identify the p1 and p2 and so far I'm assuming that some oracle is giving me the p1 and p2 and so the p1 and p2 that I'm going to use here and once again this is given to us by a oracle is p1 is x greater than zero and p2 is x greater than equal to zero and now we can show that this choice of p1 and p2 satisfies all our five verification conditions. I'm going to quickly go through all those five verification conditions to convince you that indeed they are all old. The first verification condition was that if I start with p and the Boolean condition which is x not equal to zero evaluates it true then p1 holds so that's our first verification condition which says p and b implies p1 p is x is greater than equal to zero b is x is not equal to zero implies p1 which is x is greater than zero and you can see that this is actually true because if x is greater than equal to zero and it's not zero then it must be strictly greater than zero and that that's our vc1 that actually holds and similarly the vc2 is basically the case when b evaluates to false so if x is greater than equal to zero and x equals zero which means b evaluates to false then I go all the way to the end and so the proof obligation here is x is greater than equal to zero and x equals zero this is not b implies x equals zero which is q and once again this is this is easy to see because if x equals zero is on the left hand side then obviously x equals zero on the right hand side is also true for the implication. Now the third proof obligation basically relates p1 and p2 across the body of the loop the body of the loop in this case is x colon equals x minus one it's an assignment statement and we know what is the corresponding encoding for this whole triple which is p1 body p2 it's just p1 implies p2 where inside p2 you replace all x's with x minus one and so what is p1 that's just x is greater than zero what is p2 its x is greater than equal to zero but we want to replace all x's with x minus one so that becomes x minus one is greater than equal to zero so vc3 is x greater than zero implies x minus one is greater than equal to zero and once again this is you can see that this is true if x is strictly positive then x minus one can either be also strictly positive or it can be equal to zero all right so that's vc3 vc4 is basically relating p2 and p1 across the loop edge so if p2 holds and b holds then p1 holds so p2 and b imply p1 and x is greater than equal to zero is p2 and x is not equal to zero is b and x is strictly greater than zero is p1 so x is greater than equal to zero and x is not equal to zero implies x is strictly greater than zero once again we can see that this vc this verification condition which is vc4 also holds because if it's non-negative and not zero then it's strictly positive and finally our last verification condition which is vc5 says if p2 if p2 holds and b evaluates to false then i come all the way to the end of the loop so p2 and not b implies i should say q here and the corresponding expressions are x is greater than equal to zero for p2 x equals zero for not b implies x equals zero for q and once again it's easy to see that this vc5 also holds because x equals zero is on both sides of the implication so this is how you are going to go about proving a whole triple that involves a loop once again we are we have assumed here that the p1 and p2 which are the intermediate predicates have come to us through an oracle we have not really discussed what is the algorithm to identify these p1 and p2 but let's say somebody has given us this p1 and p2 such that all the five verification conditions hold then we have been able to complete the verification proof
