Title: Compiler Design Module 124 11: Field sensitive pointer analysis
Video ID: DkJt_Osfzbk
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

So we've been discussing pointer analysis and we looked at Anderson's algorithm. I'm going to generalize Anderson's algorithm by looking at more programming language constructs than the four constructs that we considered when we discussed Anderson's algorithm. So for example, languages like C allow you to do pointer arithmetic. So you can do P equals Q plus I, where both P and Q may be pointers. What happens to the points to information and the points to graph in the presence of such pointer arithmetic or the program can contain an instructional form P equals ampersand Q pointer dot F. This is C syntax. So for example, if I was to draw this, then if Q is pointing here, then P could point anywhere within the object that Q points to, right? So that's what P equals Q plus I means. So for example, this distance here between Q and P could be I or even P equals ampersand Q dot F. So if F was a field here, then ampersand Q dot F is basically a pointer to that field within this larger object that Q points to. And similarly, P equals ampersand AI. So if A is an array, then once again, this could be, you know, this whole distance could be I into whatever is the element size, for example, I into four or whatever. And so P is pointing to within Q. And in all these cases, notice that P is pointing to the same object as what Q is pointing to. So P is only pointing to within that, just the only difference is that P could potentially point to the middle of that object. And that also we are just going to consider that as saying that P is pointing to the same abstract object as Q. So when we say that P points to an abstract object, then we basically really mean that P points to either the beginning or the middle of that abstract object. And so all these instructions basically make sure that P is also pointing to the same abstract object that Q may have been pointing to before this instruction. Now, you may ask the question, what if there was an overflow, in which case P could point to outside of this object? Well, this kind of pointing beyond the size of the object is usually illegal or undefined in languages like C and higher level languages than C. And so if P points to outside the object pointed to by Q, then that is undefined behavior. And that is the case in which case the program is actually illegal. When I say illegal, it does not necessarily mean that the compiler throws an error. But overall, it's the programmer's responsibility to ensure that this kind of situation never happens, which means through pointer arithmetic or through an address taken field or through an address taken element of an array, you cannot point beyond the boundary of an object to which the original pointer Q or A were pointing to. And so assuming that this or anything that kind of any kind of any such operation that allows the pointer P to point beyond the boundary of the object, then we can be we can kind of safely say that P points within the object that Q or A pointed to at the beginning of the instruction before the execution of that instruction. So using that fact, we can just treat all these three different programming constructs as simple copies, which means P equals Q plus I is just treated as P equals Q, because after all, P is just going to point to within the object that Q points to. Similarly, P equals ampersand Q dot F treated as P equals Q once again, because P is just going to point to within whatever Q is pointing to. And similarly, ampersand AI treated as a copy. And doing this, these transfer functions for these kind of operations assume that pointers cannot go out of bounds, otherwise it's UB or undefined behavior. Now, I'm going to also discuss a little bit about a field sensitive analysis for higher level languages like Java or C sharp or other languages which do not allow pointer arithmetic. You could have code something which looks like this. You could allocate a new variable. I'm going to assume that the new keyword allows me to allocate a new new location to memory object. So I use X equals new and assuming the allocation site abstraction, let's say the allocation site was one, then X will, because by virtue of this instruction, X can point to an abstract object one, which represents all the objects that are allocated at allocation site one. Now, when I say X dot F equals new, now that's basically saying that let's say X was pointing to some object, then inside that, if there was a field F, then that is now being updated. So that's being updated to point to whatever is being allocated at this instruction two. And anything that means allocated instruction two in an allocation site abstraction can point to two. So in other words, this field can point to two. And in our analysis, we're just going, so this is just like saying that the contents of the object pointed to by X can point to whatever we are doing. And that's as good as saying that star X equals new. So the only difference between star X equals new and X pointer dot F equals new is that in this case, in star X equals new, we were actually overwriting the entire object. Here, we are only updating a field of that object. But in either case, there exists a pointer in that object that can potentially point to an object that is represented by abstract object two. And so just treat such statements as star X. X pointer dot F is nothing but just treated as star X when you were doing the points to transfer function. And so this becomes star X equals new. Similarly, if you do X dot G equals new, then X pointer dot G equals new, then becomes star X equals new also. And the resulting points to graph for this using Anderson's algorithm would look something like this. And one, which is the object allocated at one, may point to objects allocated at site two or objects allocated at site three. OK, so this is the points to graph if we use a field in sensitive analysis. So notice that in this analysis, we are not considering the fact that, well, this address can only live in the field F. And that address can only live in field G. For example, if there was another field G here, then this can point to three. But in this field in sensitive analysis, we are assuming we're just kind of approximating this whole thing as a single abstract object and saying that, hey, the contents of this whole thing can point to either two or three. And that's what this resulting points to graph is giving us. And that's why it's called a field in sensitive analysis, because we're not being sensitive to the fact that different pointers may be stored at different fields. OK, so let's see what are the implications of that. So, for example, if I do y equals x pointer dot G, once again, what I'm doing is I'm reading the contents of the object pointed to by x and storing them in y. And that's as good as saying y equals star x in our field in sensitive analysis. So x was pointing to one and one could contain pointers to either two or three based on the field in sensitive analysis we did in the previous slide. Then y can now point to whatever one may point to, so y may point to either two or three. Now, once again, because it's a field in sensitive analysis, we are ignoring the fact that y is only leading the field G and G could only contain an object of type three. And so a more precise analysis should have told me that y can only point to three and not to two. But because I'm doing a field in sensitive analysis, I'm getting an imprecision because of that. And so it basically says y can point to either two or three. So it turns out that you can do better. And but for that, you basically, you know, the language type system should be should not allow things like pointer arithmetic or address taken fields, because in the presence of pointer arithmetic and address taken fields, it becomes very hard to say that whether this pointer may point anywhere in the middle of the object or whether it may point to field F or whether it may point to field G, because if I just say Q equals P plus I, then, you know, if I if I is not a compile time constant, then whether P could point to field F or G becomes very hard to say. But many languages like Java and C sharp do not allow such pointer arithmetic or do not allow address taken fields, in which case you can track the contents of each field of each abstract object separately. So you can say that the F field of abstract object one can point to two and the G field of abstract object one point can point to three. And that gives you more precise information. So, for example, you can say that, you know, in the same example that we had is that X dot F equals new. So that means one, the F field in object allocated at site one can point to two and the G field of an object allocated at site one can point to an object allocated at site three. So the way to represent this in a points to graph is to label these edges based on the fields. So the edge label identifies the field through which it may point. So, for example, one may point to two through F and it may point to three through G. But notice that through G, one may not point to two. One may only point to if G is dereferenced, then only three will be obtained, but not two. And so this this points to graph is more precise than the field in sensitive analysis graph that we saw earlier. Now, let's see the implications. So, for example, if I do Y equals X dot G, then Y is dereferencing looking at the field G, the content of the field G in the object pointed to by X. The object pointed to by X is one. And the field that's been dereferenced is G. So that's three. And so Y based on this field sensitive analysis can only point to three, but not to two. And so the field sensitive constraints differentiate based on the field names because we know that the field G is being dereferenced. And so based on that, we can say that Y is only pointing to three and not to two. And this is a more precise analysis than the one that we saw earlier, which was a field in sensitive analysis. But recall that a field sensitive analysis is only possible if in the absence of pointer arithmetic and address taken fields. Well, it is in general possible. It may be possible even in the presence of pointer arithmetic and address taken fields, but it will become more complex. So typically these kind of analysis would be easier and more practical to implement for languages which do not allow pointer arithmetic and address taken fields.
