Title: Compiler Design Module 136 : Group Reuse
Video ID: -5mUqO6S91A
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

So we have looked at self-reuse both temporal and spatial and now we're going to discuss another type of reuse which is group reuse. So let's look at an example to understand what is group reuse. For i equals 0, i is less than n, i++, ai equals ai plus 1 plus a2 into i plus 1. Now group reuse basically means that the reuse is across different axes. So recall that self-reuse was when the same axis was having multiple reuse, in other sense the same memory location is being accessed multiple times by the same axis, let's say ai or maybe ai plus 1. Group reuse basically deals with the situation where there is the same location being accessed by dynamic instances of different static axes. So ai is one static axis, ai plus 1 is another static axis and so across these two static axes if dynamic instances access the same location, same memory location, then we call it group reuse and the group in this case is formed by the two static axes ai and ai plus 1. And similarly I can do a similar group between ai and a2 into i plus 1 or the third group could be between ai plus 1 and a2 into i plus 1. So just for simplicity, I am just going to consider two different groups. One is ai and ai plus 1 and the other is ai and a2 into i plus 1. We consider pair-wise groups usually and so there are three pairs here but we are just looking at two different pairs, ai versus ai plus 1 is one group and ai versus a2 into i plus 1 is the other group. Now if I look at the first group ai and ai plus 1, notice that i is ranging from 0 to n. So in the first iteration when i is 0, ai is going to access a0 and ai plus 1 is going to access a1. In the second iteration ai is going to access a1 and ai plus 1 is going to access a2 and so on. And so whatever was accessed by the 0th iteration in ai plus 1 is being accessed by the first iteration in ai. And so in general, anything that is accessed in the nth iteration or let's say kth iteration by ai plus 1 is being accessed by ai in the k plus 1th iteration. And so there are going to be n minus 1 instances of reuse, n minus 1 dynamic instances of reuse across these two static accesses and those n minus 1 instances are going to be a1, a2, a3, a4, dot dot dot, an minus 1. So everything except the first instance. Let's look at the reuse between ai versus a2 into i plus 1. So in the first iteration ai is going to access a0 and a2 into i plus 1 is going to access a1. In the second iteration ai is going to access a1 and a2 into i plus 1 is going to access a3, 2 into i which is 1, 2 plus 1, 3. So it's going to access 3. In the second iteration ai is going to access a2 and a2 into i plus 1 is going to access a5 and so on. So there is some reuse but the reuse is less in this case because ai is basically incrementing by 1 on every iteration whereas a2 into i plus 1 is incrementing by 2 on every iteration. And so we can say that the amount of reuse in the first group which is ai and a i plus 1 is order is n minus 1 exactly speaking because it's n minus 1 different instances which are going to have dynamic instances which are going to have reuse. On the other hand, ai versus 2 into a2 into i plus 1 is going to have order n by 2 reuse. It's only the odd elements of a that are going to have reuse. The even elements are not going to have reuse. Let's look at another example. This time you're going to look at a two dimensional example. For i equals 0 to m, for j equals 0 to m, aij equals ai plus 1 j, a of i plus 1 j plus 2 plus a of 2 into i, 2 into j. Now once again we're using the same logic that we had in our previous example. What is the reuse between ai comma j and ai plus 1 j plus 2? Once again there is almost order m into n reuse because except for the boundary conditions which are the first one or two elements, because it's a two dimensional array, one row and two columns, so that's two elements, except for them everything else is going to have a reuse. On the other hand, in the second group which is aij versus a2 into i comma 2 into j, the a2i comma 2j is only accessing even elements which have even rows and even columns, whereas ai comma j is accessing all rows and all columns. And once again, the amount of reuse in the first case is order mn, whereas the amount of reuse in the second case is order mn divided by 4. In general, the higher the multiple or something like that, the less the reuse becomes across the group. And so the most interesting reuse here that we want to focus on is the one which has the maximum possibility of reuse and that's the first case which is ai and ai plus 1, j plus 2. So what is the common thread between the two examples? Why do I use green for one group and red for the other? Because the red group basically has less reuse and what is the generalization? Well, the reuse is higher if the accesses, if those static accesses have the same coefficient matrix, because if they have the same coefficient matrix, it basically means that they're going to have reuse which is proportional to the number of accesses made by each of those static accesses. In the first example, the coefficient matrix of ai was just 1, whereas of a of 2 into i plus 1 was 2 and so the coefficient matrices were different. When the coefficient matrices are different, the reuse becomes less. Similarly, in the second case of two dimensional array, if the coefficients are 1, 1, 0, 0, 1, which is ai comma j or ai plus 1, j minus 2, then we have more reuse. Whereas if the coefficient matrix was different, for example, in case of a 2i comma 2j, then we have less reuse. So we basically want to focus on those kind of reuse which has the maximum bang for the buck, where there's maximum payoff. And so the maximum payoff is when the coefficient matrices are equal, in which case the two accesses are very aligned except for the constant offset, which means that there may be some boundary cases where we don't have reuse, but by and large across the array, we have a large amount of reuse. And so that's why we're going to focus our group reuse efforts on from a compiler standpoint. And once again, this is just a trade-off between how much kind of complexity and compile time you want to spend versus what is the payoff. The payoff is higher if the coefficient matrices are equal. So recall that every array access in a loop nest can be characterized by one of the parameters is capital F comma small f where capital F is the coefficient matrix and small f is the offset. And so let's say I have four different accesses, Fx comma F1, Fx comma F2, Fy comma F3, Fy comma F4. Then based on this rule, I'm going to group like this so that I basically look at group reuse only for those accesses which have the same coefficient matrix. In this case, the first and the second accesses have the same coefficient matrix and the third and the fourth accesses have the same coefficient matrix. And so these are the groups that we'll be interested in from a reuse standpoint. We'll not be interested in reuse across the first and the third static array accesses, for example. So now let's look at an example to see what is the group reuse and other types of reuse in this example to understand group reuse better. So once again, it's a two-depth loopness for i equals 1 to n, for j equals 0 to n, z i comma j equals z i minus 1 comma j, all right? And here is my coefficient matrix for both these accesses. So for the first accesses, the coefficient matrix is 1, 0, 0, 1. That represents i comma j. And recall that my iteration indices are i, j. And similarly, for the second access, once again, my coefficient matrix is again 1, 0, 0, 1. However, the small f's are different in both cases. In the first case, the small f, which I call f1, is 0, 0. There is no additive constant. And in the second case, it's minus 1, 0, because there's an additive constant of minus 1 for i. Now my first question is, what is the amount of reuse in this particular loop nest? And the first question is, what is the self-temporal reuse? Is there self-temporal reuse between z i, j with itself? Or is there self-temporal reuse with z i minus 1 comma j and with itself? Well, to answer that question, recall that we need to look at the coefficient matrix capital F and calculate the rank of that matrix. So in this case, the coefficient matrix for both these accesses is 1, 0, 0, 1. And so the rank of this matrix is 2. And because the rank of the matrix is a full-ranked matrix, there is no self-temporal reuse. Recall this is how we used to figure out whether there is self-temporal reuse or not. Our second question is, is there self-spatial reuse? And well, let's see. Recall that for self-spatial reuse, we basically get rid of the last row of the coefficient matrix, pretending as though the last row is basically fitting in the entire cache line. And so if we get rid of the last row, then we are left with a one-ranked matrix, which is just a single row, 1, 0. And yes, indeed, there is self-spatial reuse. And that can also be seen, because assuming that the last row of the matrix is completely fitting in my cache line, then when I access z i 0 and then I access z i 1, there is reuse between z i 0 and z i 1, because they are going to be accessing the same cache line. Under our assumption that the entire last-level row is basically fitting in the cache line. So yes, indeed, there is self-spatial reuse. But recall that self-spatial reuse has this very loose assumption that the entire row fits in the cache line, and so it has to be taken with a pinch of salt. Now finally, we will come to our topic in this module, which is, is there group reuse? And notice that when I say group reuse, the word temporal is implicit. I'm really talking about group temporal reuse here. And the answer is, well, the first thing I want to check is whether the coefficient matrices are equal. So there are only two axes, so there can be only one group in this example. I've used a simple example. And the coefficient matrices are equal. So if the coefficient matrices were not equal, we would have just said, no, there is no group reuse. Because we are only interested in that type of group reuse, where there's a large amount of reuse, and which can only happen if the coefficient matrices were equal. So there's no, we assume that there's no reuse. So in this case, there is reuse because the coefficient, there may be reuse if the coefficient matrices are equal. Indeed, they are equal. And so there is reuse. And so how do I figure out when there is reuse? So the reuse happens when, whenever, you know, we basically say that the array accesses access the same memory location. In other words, if the first access is accessing i1, j1, or, you know, in short, I say i1 vector form under the underline. And similarly, for the second access, it's i2 vector, which is representing the scalars i2, j2. Then when is f i1 plus f1 equal to f i2 plus small f2? And the answer to this is basically because the coefficient matrices are equal, I can just rewrite this equation as i1 minus i2 equals f1 into, you know, I just kind of rearrange the things and substitute the values. I get minus one and zero. So in other words, if i1 vector minus i2 vector equals minus one comma zero, the two iterations are going to access the same location. In other words, whenever i1 equals i2 plus one, whenever i1 equals i2 plus one and j1 equals j2, the scalars, then we're going to have reuse. Notice that there is reuse here, which is a good thing. But is there locality? Is there locality across this reuse? Well, if I want to answer, so first of all, there is reuse. The answer is yes, just because the coefficient matrices are equal. Now the second question is, I want to point out that we're just looking at the coefficient matrices. One question that you may have is, what if the offset is very large, in which case the corner cases become really large, and so the reuse becomes really small? Indeed, that's possible. But we're just using an approximation here, assuming that the boundary cases are going to be small, and so if the coefficient matrices are equal, we assume there is group reuse. Now the other question is, is there locality? And then we want to answer the question of locality. It's not enough to just have reuse. We also have to figure out what is the reuse distance. And in this case, the reuse distance can just be figured out by figuring out what is the distance between the iteration count of the first axis and the iteration count of the second axis when they access the same element. And that is already given by this particular equation, which is I1 minus I2 equals minus one comma zero. So what is the reuse distance? Well, notice that here, the I, which is different across the two iterations, is the second dimension. The innermost dimension is J, and the second innermost dimension is I, and that's where there is a distance, difference, there needs to be a distance between the two iterations for there to be reused. And so the distance, the reuse distance in this example is actually order N, because, for example, Z00 and Z10, so basically I'll have to go through N iterations of the inner loop to have reuse. For example, if I equals one and J equals zero, then ZI comma J is going to access one comma zero. And then when I equals two and J equals zero, then the second access, the second static access is going to access Z1 comma zero. So basically the distance, the two iterations that are going to have reuse are one comma zero and two comma zero. And what's the distance between one comma zero and two comma zero? Well, that's actually the entire length of the inner loop, which is order N, because we are basically going to traverse the loopness in the lexicographic order, ascending lexicographic order. So one comma zero, one comma one, one comma one, two, one comma three, all the way to one comma N. And then we come to two comma zero. So the reuse distance is pretty large. In general, if I want to calculate the reuse distance, once I have the distance vector, which is this minus one comma zero, I just need to scan bottom up in this reuse vector and find the last non-zero dimension that is not zero, all right? So I've written here equals one, but I should say not, which is not zero. And whatever is that dimension, let's say that dimension is K, then the reuse distance becomes order N to the power K where N is the length of iteration space of one dimension on average. So in this case, that particular index is one, K is one, and so the reuse distance is order N to the power one, or order N. If, for example, the loopness was in the other order, which means J was outermost iteration variable index, and I was the innermost iteration index, then the distance vector would have been zero comma minus one, in which case my reuse distance would have been order N to the power zero, because the last non-zero value in the distance vector would have been at index zero, so it would become order N to the power zero, which is order one, and reuse distance would have become really small, and then there would have been locality, all right? But here, there is no locality because order N is pretty large in terms of temporal locality, but there is reuse in this particular example as it stands right now.
