Title: Compiler Design Module 101 : Distributivity of a DFA Framework
Video ID: rkAA1ksJYPc
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

So, last time we talked about the monotonicity of a DFA framework and recall that monotonicity of a framework means that for all functions belonging to the family of transfer functions, if x is less than equal to y, then fx is less than equal to fy, for all functions f. Now, I want to clarify that this does not mean that fx is less than equal to x, it just means that it maps smaller, every function maps smaller values to smaller results. But that does not mean that the result needs to be necessarily less than the value itself. For example, here is the reaching definitions transfer function, fx equals x minus scale union gen, and let's say gen is D1 and kill is D2, so they are both singleton sets, and let's say x was D2, then f of D2 would be D1 and D1 is not less than equal to D2. D1 is incomparable to D2. In fact, I can also create examples where fx can be greater than equal to x. So, it's not the case that fx needs to be less than equal to x, it just means that if x1 is less than equal to x2, then fx1 is less than equal to fx2. So it's possible that f maps values to larger values, but it needs to be monotonic. So, I think that it's clear, I've been saying this many times. Alright, so monotonicity means that, the other way to represent monotonicity is that f of x meet y is less than equal to fx meet fy for all x and y. Alright, so in other words, first meet and then apply the transfer function is less than equal to, first apply the transfer function and then meet. Okay, and we also saw some examples of this in one of the previous lecture modules. Now, here is a special case and this special case is when for all transfer functions in belonging to the family, fx meet y equals fx meet fy for all possible x and y. Okay, so notice that this is just a special case of monotonicity. Here, I'm saying that it doesn't really matter whether you meet first and then apply the transfer function or you first apply the transfer function and then meet. You're going to get the same result in both cases. And this property, if it is true about your framework, is also called distributivity. In other words, if this property is true, then the framework is called distributor. Right, so distributivity is a special case of monotonicity. Now, let's use an example to understand distributivity in more detail. So, let's look at the reaching definitions example and recall that in reaching definitions, fx equals x minus kill union gen. And here we know that this framework is monotone. This is something that we have discussed last time. To summarize, x1 is less than equal to x2 is equivalent to saying x1 is a superset of x2. And so, if I look at fx1 and fx2, they basically evaluate to these expressions on your right. And we can see that if x1 is a superset of x2, then fx1 must also be a superset of x2. And so, it's very clear that this framework is monotone. And this is something that we have also discussed previously. But is this framework distributor? And to answer that question, we have to use the other definition of monotonicity which says that if x1 meet x2, is it less than equal to fx1 meet fx2? And recall that for reaching definitions, x1 meet x2 is nothing but x1 union x2. So, the meet operator is the set union operator. So, is it true, in other words, that f of x1 union x2 would always be less than equal to f of x1 union f of x2? So, we can kind of try to solve for this. And all we need to do is basically substitute for fx1 and for fx2 and similarly for fx1 union fx2. So, if I substitute, I get f of x1 union fx2 is nothing but x1 union x2 minus scale union gen. f of x1 is x1 minus scale union gen and f of x2 is x2 minus scale union gen. And so, I put a union in the middle because basically I am doing fx1 union fx2. And so, this is the new equation that I am interested in solving. And is this actually true? Well, if I just rearrange the terms, you would find that these are actually equivalent. So, any element that belongs to the left hand side which is a set also belongs to the right hand side and vice versa. Okay, I am not going into the details of proving it but you can perhaps see it that for example any element that belongs to x1 and belongs to kill will not be present in the left hand side. Neither will it be present in the right hand side. On the other hand, so you can do this case analysis. So, if an element is present in x1 and not present in kill and not present in gen or if it is present in x1 and present in kill. And you would find that for all these cases, the element belongs to the left hand side if and only if it belongs to the right hand side. And so, these two sets are actually equivalent. So, what does that tell us? It tells us that f of x1 union x2 equals f of x1 union f of x2. In other words, f of x1 meet x2 equals f of x1 meet of x of x2. Which means that our reaching definitions framework is not only monotone but it is also distributed. So, it is both monotone and distributed. So, once again a framework, DFA framework f v meet is distributed if and only if f of x meet y equals f of x meet f of y for all f belonging to the family of transfer functions capital F and of course for all values x and y. Now, this is equivalent to saying that if a framework is distributive, if you first meet input and then apply f, it is going to give the same answer as you first apply f individually and then meet. Distributivity implies monotonicity but not vice versa. So, distributivity recall is a special case of monotonicity. If distributivity is true, then monotonicity is also true. If f is distributive, then f is also monotone. But the other way is of course not true. So, here is an example where I am going to try to show that this particular example of constant propagation with a special choice of transfer functions is monotone but it is not distributive. So, recall the constant propagation example. This is a semi-lattice of the constant propagation algorithm which is the top value, the bottom value, which says not a constant and then there is a constant value for some constant c. So, this is a simplified way of representing the lattice. Actually, there could be large number of values for c but this is just a simplified way of representing the same lattice. Now, there were two ways to represent the transfer functions depending on what is the level of precision that you want in your DFA analysis. You could either say that I just specify the transfer function using kill and gensets. So, if the statement is of the form x equals c, then it generates x, c. And similarly, if it overrides some y, then it kills anything that involves y in it. So, that is one way of specifying constant propagation. And in fact, we have kind of discussed this in the past as well. The other option is to specify the transfer function in a more nuanced way. For example, in this nuanced way, if the input x is, let's say, a equals 2 and b equals 3, and let's say the statement s for which the transfer function fs is being computed is z equals a plus b, then our first option is just going to say z equals a plus b. It doesn't really generate any new constant definition. But the more nuanced implementation of the transfer function could say that oh, I know that a is a constant because a is 2, b is a constant because b is 3 in x, which is the input value. So, I can say that z is also a constant which is formed by adding the two constants, 2 and 3, and so z equals 5. And so, in this nuanced implementation of the transfer function, fs of x equals a, 2, b, 3 and z, 5. So, this is the second option. And you can imagine that the second option is going to give you more precise results. It's going to identify more constant relationships than the first option, because the first option in this case would have just said that z is not a constant. So, my first observation here is, if I use option number 1, then it is distributive. Why is it distributive? It's the same argument that I use for reaching definitions. So, anything that can be represented, anything where, any DFA framework where the transfer function can be represented as a kill and a gen set is just distributive because I can show that f of x1 meet x2 equals f of x1 meet f of x2. If the meet operator is either a set union or set intersection or things like that. In that case, I can show that this kind of thing is distributive. Exactly the same argument as we had for reaching definitions a couple of slides ago. So, I'm not going to discuss option 1 anymore. We already know it's distributive. The interesting thing here is whether option 2 is distributive. First of all, is it even monotone? So, let's check whether it is monotone or not. First of all, I want to say that it is monotone because smaller values in this particular lattice basically mean fewer constant relationships. So, if I start with fewer constant relationships, my transfer function can only produce fewer constant relationships in the output. So, if I start with fewer constant relationships in the input, then my transfer function can only produce fewer constant relationships in the output. In other words, the framework is monotone even in this option 2 because my transfer function cannot just magically create new constant relationships. Now, let's try to understand whether it is distributive. So, to understand that, I'm going to use a count example. Here's the count example. x1 maps a to 2 and b to 3. So, let's say x1 is a set of tuples of variables, constant values and in this case, it maps a to 2 and b to 3. Similarly, there's another value x2 which maps a to 3 and b to 2. And let's say the statement s is z equals a plus b. Now, we know that fs x1 is going to be I'm going to see that a is 2 and b is 3 and z is just a plus b. So, I can say z is 5 because I know the input values are constant for a and b. So, I know that the output value is constant for z. And so, fs of x1 equals a equals 2, b equals 3 and z equals 5. So, I've inferred a new constant relationship based on this option 2 transfer function. Similarly, fs of x2 is also a equals 3, b equals 2, that is unchanged and then z equals 5. So, in both cases, I've been able to infer that another constant relationship which is z equals 5. Now, let's see what is fs x1 meet of fs x2. So, recall that in the constant propagation example, the meet operator is set intersection. And so, when I do set intersection of these two sets, then I basically get the only common element here is z equals 5. Because a equals 2 and a equals 3, intersection is null. b equals 3 and b equals 2 intersection is null. But z equals 5 and z equals 5, the intersection preserves this relationship. And so, fs x1 meet of fs x2 is z equals 5. Now, to check distributivity, I need to check what is fs of x1 meet x2. So, first of all, what is x1 meet x2? x1 meet x2 here is the empty set. So, x1 meet x2 is the empty set because there is no commonality between the two sets. And then, fs of the empty set is just going to be the empty set. Because if I don't know that a is a constant, if I don't know that b is a constant, then I can't really say that z is a constant. And so, f of x1 meet x2 is also the empty set and that is not equal to f of x1 meet of f of x2. And it is less than that, but it is not equal to and so this framework is not distributed. So, this particular way of specifying a transfer function is monotone but not distributed. It is more precise than the option 1 transfer function which was actually distributed. But even though this is more precise, it is not distributed. So, precision and distributivity are two orthogonal things. To understand the implications of distributivity, what does it really mean? What does it mean for a function to be distributive or for it to be not to be distributive? So, for example, we have looked at constant propagation and we said that it is not distributive. We looked at it from a mathematical point of view, but if we look at it from a control flow graph, operational point of view of the DFA algorithm, then let's say I have these two basic blocks. One of them is setting a to 2 and b to 3. The other one is setting a to 3 and b to 2. So, this is going to produce this value x1 which is going to map a to 2 and b to 3. On the right hand side, I am going to produce a value x2 that maps a to 3 and b to 2. And then I am going to do z equals a plus b. Now, our DFA algorithm is first going to do compute x1 meet x2 and then apply f on that x1 meet x2. And so, what it is going to give me is x1 meet x2 is going to give me the empty set and then fs of x1 meet x2 is also going to give me the empty set. On the other hand, if I had done the other thing which is first apply the transfer function and then meet on both the branches, this is the diagram I am using to kind of represent that, then I would have got fs of x1 meet of fs of x2 and as we have seen in our previous discussion, that would have given me the singleton set z equals 5. And so, the answer is different depending on whether you met first or whether you apply the transfer function first. And so, this framework is not distributed. On the other hand, if it was distributed, it really shouldn't have mattered whether you executed the meet operator first or whether you executed the transfer function first. Notice that in our particular algorithm, in our fixed point iteration, we always meet first and then apply the transfer function. And so, the result we would have gotten for this particular example would have been the empty set.
