Title: Compiler Design Module 151 : Primitive Affine Transforms
Video ID: xkMuK6RucS8
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

So, by now we have already looked at the whole pipeline of affine transformations in the context of space partitioning constraints. And this is what an affine transformation pipeline typically looks like. Let's say you have the original program and then you basically bring it into a representation which is amenable for polyhedral analysis. In particular, the polyhedral representation involves identifying what are all the statements, recall that these are three address code statements. What are their corresponding iteration spaces and from there, what are the data dependencies and things like that. Once you have that, then you will do some kind of mathematical constraint generation. For example, for space partitioning constraints, we were interested in maximizing the rank of the function, the fine function from iteration space to processor space for each possible statement, provided the data dependence constraints are met. Then we would do some kind of solving. For example, we use Gaussian elimination or integer linear programming or some other such technique to basically identify a solution which satisfies the constraints and also maximizes some objective function, for example, the rank of the fine function. Finally, after the constraints have been solved, we obtain a solution for the constraints and using that solution, we generate code. Because the formulation of the constraints was such that the code generated code would be sound, moreover, the code generation strategy itself is sound, we expect that the generated code would be equivalent to the original program. And finally, we do code tightening and these are all the techniques that we discussed. For example, tightening of loop bounds, elimination of empty iterations and also elimination of redundant tests are all examples of code tightening. Some of these involve just tightening of bounds. Others involve potentially code duplication and specialization. So that is the general pipeline of affine transformations. And today I'm going to discuss one of two of the seven primitive affine transforms. And here's an interesting fact about these affine transforms. Every affine transformation, like the ones that are generated by the pipeline that I just showed you in the previous slide, can be expressed as a series of primitive affine transforms. So I'm going to introduce seven different primitive affine transforms over the course of the next few modules. And it's interesting to know that every affine transformation can be kind of modeled as some sequence or some series of these seven primitive affine transforms. So what are these seven primitive affine transforms and how can we get them? The first primitive affine transform that I'm going to discuss is loop fusion, which basically maps multiple loop indices of different loops to the same loop index of a single loop. And it is really interesting for you to see that many of these or most of these affine loop transforms are actually the results of space partitioning constraints when we are trying to maximize parallelism under no synchronization constraints. Okay, so let's see how fusion basically can be done and how it relates to space partitioning constraints. So first of all, let's take an example to understand fusion. So let's say I have this original program for i equals 0 to n, i plus plus y i equals z i and for j equals 0 to n, x j equals y j. Now I'm going to use my affine transformation pipeline on this particular program, the pipeline that I showed you on the first slide and show what it converts this program to. And it will turn out that the resulting program is going to be actually a fuse program. In other words, that's exactly the transformation of loop fusion, which also happens to be one of our seven primitive affine transforms. So let's try to solve for this using our space partitioning constraints that have been discussing over the past few lecture modules. So the first thing here is what basically to represent this program in a polyhedral representation. So there are two statements y i equals z i and x j equals y j. Also notice that there are data dependencies from each of these statements to the other ones. For example, y i for i equals j will be conflicting with y j for i equals j in the second group. Right. So there's something common here. So there are some data dependencies. It's not like all these different statements are completely data parallel. Also, I would point out that I'm using the word statement here for the entire assignment. Although when we actually consider a polyhedral representation, we are actually looking at every access as a single three address code statement. But it turns out because there are data dependencies, we basically are going to have this whole thing mapped to the same processor. So we can just call this whole C statement as a single statement. And so let's say this first statement is S1 and the second statement S2. In my polyhedral representation, I'm going to basically have representations of the iteration space and say S1 has iteration space going from zero to n over i and S2 has iteration space zero to n over j. And so this form are alternate representation of the program, alternate polyhedral representation of the program. And now I can analyze this polyhedral representation and construct constraints to potentially make this program more parallel or things like that. So I'm going to use my space partitioning constraints, which say that whenever there is a dependence, the two partition, the two statements should map to the same processor or different iterations of the two statements or the same statement should map to the same processor whenever there is a data dependency. Now, just very, you know, just looking at it, I can say that two different iterations of S1 will never have a data dependency because every iteration of S1 is reading or writing a different element of both y and z. Similarly, different iterations of S2 will never have a data dependency. But some iterations of S1 will have data dependencies on some iterations of S2. And so my space partitioning constraints are going to look like the following that whenever there's a data dependency from S1 to S2, then they should map to the same processor. Now, when will there be a data dependency from S1 to S2? Well, whenever i equals j, right, because that's when yi would be the same location as yj and recall that one of them is going to be a right. And so I'm going to, you know, basically specify these space partitioning constraints and say, okay, with these constraints, can you find the mapping from i to p where p is the processor space and j to p, once again, the same processor space such that there's the corresponding affine functions have maximum rank. So let's say the function for small s1, the statement S1 is represented by capital C1 and small c1. And let's say the function for small s2 is capital C2 and small c2. Then it must be true that capital C1 and C2 are maximum rank solutions to the space partitioning constraints that I just explained. And finally, I'm going to get this solution. I'm going to solve those space partitioning constraints based on the solution method that we discussed a couple of modules back, and we're going to get the solution that for S1, p equals i. So basically every iteration can be mapped to a different processor. That's a maximum rank solution because the rank of the iteration space is one, so the rank of the processor space is also one. There are no data dependencies. This is the maximum rank solution. And then for S2, we have p equals j. Now this is slightly subtle because notice that I could have said p equals j plus n or something like that, but this would be wrong because it's important that whenever i equals j, they both map to the same processor and this particular mapping p equals i and p equals j ensures that whenever i equals j, the processor IDs of the two iterations are going to be identical. And this is important for our space partitioning constraints that say that whenever there's a data dependency, that is i equals j, they should map to the same processor. And so this is our solution p equals i and p equals j. I could have, for example, changed the additive constant of both of them. For example, I could have said plus one or plus one, but then, I mean, basically our space partitioning constraints would dictate that they should have the same additive constant. It can't be that this is plus one and this is plus two, because once again, the data dependence constraints say that whenever i maps to p and i equals j, then j must also map to the same p. So these are our solution for the constraints. And now I'm going to do code generation. So what do I do? What's my simplest code generation strategy? I'll have an outer loop on p and then I will stick the whole original program as the body of this outer loop. And then I will predicate each statement with if i equals p or if j equals p and things like that. And so this is my generated code. My outer loop is for p equals zero to n. That's the iteration space of p obtained using Fourier Moleskine method. And then this is just the original program, except that each of the statements s1 and s2 has been predicated with if i equals p, because that was the mapping for s1 and if j equals p, because that was the mapping for s2. So only those iterations of s2 should execute, which basically should be executing on this particular processor p. And of course I could have done this as an outer loop as a parallel for loop and it would be correct, but I'm just kind of using this using a sequential for loop in the rest of my discussion, because I was actually interested in discussing the loop fusion affine transform, which is actually a uniprocessor transformation and does not involve any parallelism. So, okay. So now we have this and now our final step is tightening of this code. So what do I do? I first tighten the iteration space of i and when I tighten the iteration space of i, I basically get the lower bound to be p and the upper bound to be p. In other words, the iteration space of this loop of i would only be one element, which is from p to p. And so I can just actually remove this for loop and just replace i with p and this becomes yp equals zp. And similarly, the same thing can happen to the second loop. And basically this is my tightened loop after code generation. And this is for p equals zero, p is less than equal to n, p plus plus, yp equals zp, xp equals yp. So what have I effectively achieved? I have achieved that these two loops, which were separate, have been combined into a single loop and the data dependence or the reuse distance between the data dependencies, which was actually yi and yj or in this case, yp has been significantly reduced. Earlier yi was written, you know, so earlier I would write the entire y before reading the first y element here, you know, as I'm writing to y, I'm also reading it. So I am going to have better locality and so better cache utilization. Also, I can parallelize the outer loop. So if I have a parallel machine, I can make it more efficient on that machine. Now this transformation, which basically takes two statements, S1, S2, and in different loops and combines them into a single loop, which with both S1 and S2 is called loop fusion. And it's interesting that in this particular example, the space partitioning constraints basically automatically gave us loop fusion as a, as an answer, because loop fusion in this particular example was good both for parallelism and for locality. In some cases, in some examples, it makes sense to go in the other direction. Okay. And this transformation is basically that if you have two statements in the loop, you convert them into two different statements. Now, when will this make sense? Well, if any of those statements is such that it can be, you know, you can generate better code. For example, maybe it's, there's an instruction in your architecture which can just copy, you can just use mem copy instruction in your processor that can just copy Z to Y in a very fast way. So in that case, it makes more sense to actually split this loop, which was, which had two statements into two different loops and then use the mem copy instruction for each of these loops, because the mem copy was going to be faster and let's say you didn't really care about locality because maybe, you know, the cache was not big enough to hold all the elements that are present in Y and Z, X, Y and Z. Okay. So this is, so in one case, so the affine transform, primitive affine transform number one is loop fusion of the seven that I'm going to discuss in the next few modules and primitive affine transform number two is just the opposite of loop fusion, which is loop fission. I can also draw this to understand what do, you know, what do the program's behavior look like when I, you know, in the original program and in the fuse program. And once again, I can go back and forth depending on what is the metric of interest, sometimes fission may be better, sometimes fusion may be better depending on the situation, but in the original program, all the S1s were executed before any of the S2s were executed. And so these brown lines basically indicate the order of execution and these gray lines basically indicate the data dependencies. So there were these data dependencies yet in the original program, I was basically executing all the dots, all the circles before I execute any of the crosses. In the fuse program, the data dependencies remain the same, of course, but now I basically execute the dot and the cross dot and the cross dot and the cross as I go along. And so, you know, from a pictorial point of view, this is the net effect of loop fusion going from this to this and loop fission is just going from this back to this.
