Title: Compiler Design Module 159 : Hierarchical Time
Video ID: EHg7dHfNHQw
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

In our previous module, we saw how we could basically draw the program-dependence graph by identifying if some instance of one statement is data-dependent on a later instance of another statement. This later keyword is basically the key here, because we already know how to do data-dependence constraints, and we can find if some instance of one statement has a data dependency on some instance of another statement. We already know how to do that. That's the capital F i plus small f equals capital F prime i prime plus small f prime constraint, with all the b i plus b constraints thrown in. But the later keyword basically creates an additional constraint that needs to be modeled. We saw through many examples that it is actually sometimes not obvious how to figure out whether some data-dependent iteration can occur later for some statement compared to some instance of another statement. I'm going to try to answer that question in today's module, how to figure out this later clause in the pursuit of drawing the program-dependence graph. The question really is, how do we compute the precedence relation, where the precedence relation is annotated with the two statements for which the precedence relation is being computed? In other words, the statement that we are interested in identifying is whether I1 precedes I2, where I1 is an iteration instance of S1, and I2 is an iteration instance of S2. In other words, you want to ask the question, is I1 of S1 executed before I2 of S2 in the original program? We want a mathematical constraint for this relation, that indeed, this relation that I1 of S1 is executed before I2 of S2. Once we have that mathematical constraint, we can give it to some solver, for example, an integer-linear programming solver to figure out whether this constraint is satisfiable or not. The first thing that we have already discussed in the previous module is when S1 equals S2, then this precedence constraint is really easy because then it just becomes the lexicographic ordering constraint, whether I1 precedes I2 for the same S1. The lexicographic ordering we are already very well aware of. For example, if I1 was basically I11, I12, these are the different dimensions of the loop nest, so I12 and so on, and the other one was let's say I21, I22, and so on. Then basically, we'll first compare I11 and I21. If I11 is less than I21, then this relation is true. If I11 is greater than I21, then this relation is false. If I11 is equal to I21, then we check I12 and I22, and so on. So this is a standard lexicographic dictionary comparison operator, if S1 is equal to S2. But the question is, if S1 is not equal to S2, then how do I figure this out? Of course, if S1 is not equal to S2, the obvious question is, where are S1 and S2 with respect to each other in the program order? So I'm going to answer this question for a loop nest. Assuming that the program has only structured loop nest, in other words, it doesn't have go-tos and things like that, and also if then else, then we can't really reason about it at that level of granularity. So of course, you're going to answer this question at some level of granularity. So basically, we want to answer, can I1 of S1 precede I2 of S2? And the really dumb answer is always yes. So if you just say yes every time, then what you end up with is a program dependence graph where there are edges everywhere, right? Between every two pairs of statements, there's a directed edge, and so there is no possible parallelism. So one conservative answer, one easy answer for this question precedes S1, S2 is just true. But we want to basically get as precise an answer as possible. In other words, whenever possible, we want to answer this question with a false, but we want to answer this question with a false only when it is actually false, right? So it needs to be sound, okay? So when there is control flow like if then else, then we can just say that, oh, I can't say, and in which case I can just kind of ignore the if then else and just pretend as though sometimes S2 is executed, sometimes S3 is executed, and maybe S2 and S3 are always executed or something like that, and that would still be okay. And similarly, there are go-tos and things like that. I will basically abstract them as though anything can happen there. And if I do that, then I will get over-approximate solutions. In other words, sometimes I will be answering true to the precedes S1, S2 relation when the answer was actually false, but that's okay, right? Our analysis is only precise to some extent, and beyond that, we don't really want to spend more competition power to answer the question fully precisely. I already said that the dumb, the trivial solution is always true, but that's not very meaningful. So how do I do this? So the first thing is that I basically look at the structured hierarchy in the program. So let's say I use this example. Let's say the first statement is some S0, maybe it's an assignment statement, and then there's a loop, L1, and that has a for I equals something, something. And then within the body of the loop, I have S1 followed by an inner loop on J, and inside the inner loop on J, I have some ifs and ifs. And then there's an other inner loop, which is distinct from the first inner loop of J. This inner loop is on K, and then I have S5. And now I want to answer this question of precedence between pairs of statements in this program. For example, I want to answer, can some statement, can some iteration of S4 precede some iteration of S2, right? And then for the program dependence graph, we also need the additional constraint that there should be a data dependency. But in this particular module, I won't really worry about the data dependency part. I will just try to answer the precedence question and have a mathematical modeling of the precedence operator so that we can basically give it to a solver so that it can return the answer yes or no. Okay, so the first thing I do for this kind of a hierarchical block structure program is to basically draw the hierarchy explicitly as a tree. In this case, the top level node of this whole tree is the entire program. The second, at the second level, I have S0, which is the statement. Then the for loop is another statement. So this looks very much like an abstract syntax tree, where the top level, there are two statements. First statement is S0, and the second statement is the entire loop L1. Within L1, there are one, two, three, S1, L2, L3, S5, four statements. And within L2, there is one if-then-else statement, which has S2 and S3. And recall that I just kind of ignore if-then-else. So I just consider that S2, L2 basically has two statements, S2 and S3. And similarly, L3 has one statement, S4. And so this is what my program hierarchy looks like. At the top level, I have the program, S0, L1, L1 has S1, L2, L3, S5, L2 has S2, S3, and L3 has S4. Okay? Now, I basically want to figure out what is the principle of installation, and I'm going to use this program hierarchy because this program hierarchy gives me a nice encoding of the order. For example, it tells me that S1 appears after S0 in program order, or it tells me S3 appears after S1 in program order. This is not to say that every iteration of S1 precedes every iteration of S3. That's not what it means, because after all, this is a loop. So after S3, maybe S1 gets executed. But at least in the static program order, S1 precedes S3. And we're going to use this information to basically model our precedence relation. Okay. So now let's look at examples on precedence relation. So I want to say, when is I2, iteration in I2 of S2, when does it precede iteration I3 of S3? Okay. And so the question really is, what is the iteration space of S2? The iteration space of S2 is formed by I and J, right? So some value of I and some value of J. So I, maybe I2, J2, right? And what is the iteration space of S3? Well, once again, some value of I and some value of J. So let me call that I3, J3. When will I2, J2 precede I3, J3? Well, I2 definitely precede, right? So I can always say that it never precedes, but when will it definitely precede? So I want a sound answer, which can be over-approximate. So when will I2, J2 of S2 precede I3, J3 of S3? Well, whenever either I2 is less than equal to I3, in which case, you know, the iteration number of S2 the top-level loop is basically going to occur earlier. So whenever I2 is less than I3, or whenever I2 equals I3 and J2 is less than J3, right? So this is the answer. If I2, L1, so I'm using I2, L1 to say that I had basically the L1 loop iterator. So I2, L1 is less than I3, L1, or I2, L1 equals I3, L1, and J2, L2 is less than J3, L1, all right? J3, L3, J3, L2. Okay, so this is what my, this is what this precedence operator should get mathematically model to. Notice that there's a disjunction, and then the one clause of the disjunction is that the top-level iterator is less, and the other part of the clause is that the top-level iterator is equal, and the second-level iterator is less. And this is very similar to lexicographic ordering. And why is it okay to do this? Because if J2 is less than J3, then, so this is basically, it's almost like saying that S2 and S3 are identical, but also notice that S2 is basically occurring before S3 in the program order, and in fact, it's only either S2 or S3 that gets executed, and so actually I can relax this condition to also include a less than equal to here, all right? So even if I2 equals, I3 and J2 equals J3, even then I can be sure that S2 precedes S3, because S2 is occurring earlier in the program order as per our hierarchical tree. If I ask the same question for S3 versus S2, in other words, does S3 precede S2? Well, actually, there is an if-then-else, so yes, even if J2 was equal to J3, it's only one of S3 or S2 that can execute, but in my program hierarchical tree, I have kind of abstracted away the if-then-else, and so if I ask the question for S3 versus S2, so in other words, I put I3 on the left and I2 on the right, then the less than equal to would, the brown line here would get removed, in other words, I would only, this condition of precedence would only be followed if J2 is less than J3, or J3 is less than J2 in that case, because I3 would be on the left and I2 would be on the right. Okay, anyway, so basically, to summarize, if I, now this precedence relation, I2 of S2 precedes I3 of S3, basically boils down to this mathematical constraint that I have written down in green. Okay, now let's take the example of S2 and S4. Notice that S2 is in loop L2 and S4 is in loop L3, and so what can I say about S2 and S4? Well, one thing is for sure, so what's the iteration space of S2? The iteration space of S2 is I, J, I'm going to call it I2, J2. And what's the iteration space of S4? It is I, K, I'm going to call it I4, K4. So when does I2, J2 precede I4, K4, for sure? Well, it precedes for sure only if I2 was less than equal to I4, right? Notice that if I2 is less than I4, then this whole loop of S2 would execute first, and then I4 would execute, and then S4 would execute. So if I2 is strictly less than I4, then it's very obvious. If I2 is equal to I4, then because S2 is appearing earlier in the program order as dictated by our hierarchical tree, notice that S4 is occurring to the right of S4. So I just traverse the hierarchical tree in order traversal from left to right, and from in that traversal, S2 is occurring before S4 in program order. So even if I2 was equal to S4, I can be sure that that instance of S2 would execute before the instance of S4. And so the answer here is I2 is less than equal to I4, and I superscript this with L1 just to clarify that the IA that I'm talking about is basically the iteration variable for the L1 loop. Let's switch this and say, when would an iteration I4 of S4 execute before an iteration I1 of S1? So this time, S4 is on the left-hand side, and S1 is on the right-hand side. This is different from the previous slide where S4 was on the right-hand side. So when will I4 of S4 precede I1 of S1? Well, I4 of S4, first of all, what is the iteration space of S1? It's just I, and I'm gonna call it I1. And what is the iteration space of S4? It is I, K, so I'm gonna call it I4, K4. So when does I1 of S1 execute before I4, K4 of S4? Well, one answer is very simple. If I1 was less than, sorry, I should ask the other question. When would I4, K4 of S4 execute before I1 of S1? Well, one answer is very simple. If I4 was less than I1, then I4, K4 of S4 would definitely execute before I1 of S1. And so whenever I4 is less than I1, I4 is less than I1, then I basically know that I4, K4 precedes I1 for S1. Now notice that I'm not used less than equal to because in this case, when I1 equals I4, then S1 executes before S4. But we are interested in what are the cases where S4 executes before S1. So because S4 is executing, it is occurring after S1 in the program order, the equal to sign is missing. So that's the significance of the program order. It basically, depending on the program order, we consider precedence if the iterations are equal, if they were ordered in the program order, if they are ordered in the reverse program order, then we don't consider the equal to sign. So in this case, when I4 is equal to I1, then S4 does not precede S1. On the other hand, if I was asking the reverse question, then when I1 would have been less equal to I4, then S1 would precede S4. So that's the relevance of program order. In this case, we are considering when does I4 of S4 precede I1 of S1? And the answer is whenever I4 is strictly less than I1. When I4 is equal to I1, we cannot say this. All right. Okay, here are some more examples. So if I want to ask, when would some iteration of S0, let's say I0, precede some iteration of S4, let's say I4? Notice that S0 is occurring outside every possible loop. And so the iteration space of S0 is just one, okay? And there's no I or J, it's just one. And the iteration space of I4 is I, K. And when does one occur before I, K? Well, the answer is actually because in program order, S0 occurs before S4, the answer is always. So you can see that S0 always occurs before S4. And so one way to think about this is that in the top level program, there is some kind of loop which is says for some meta variable M equals zero, M is less than equal to zero, and so on. This plus plus. So it's only one iteration that's happening of this outer loop, which is the meta loop. And so now I can say that the iteration space of S0 is M, and the iteration space of S4 is M, I, K, all right? And when will S0 occur before S4? Well, whenever M0 is less than equal to M4. But because there is only one iteration of M, M0 is always less than equal to M4, and so the answer is always. Notice that the answer is always because the constraint was M0 is less than equal to M4. If the equal to sign was not present, then the answer would not be always. In fact, it would be never, all right? So that's my next example. So let's ask the inverse question and say, when will an iteration I4 of S4 precede the iteration I0 of S0? And once again, the question would be, when would M4 be less than M0? Notice that this time I don't have the equal to sign. So it's not a less than equal to, it's a strict less than, because S4 is actually occurring after S0. So that's what the program order gives us. It gives me the extra equal to sign in my inequality operators, roughly speaking. And so, but when will this condition be true? M4 is less than M0? Never true, right? Because there's only one iteration value for M0, which is just the one, let's say, zero value. And so it can never be true that zero is strictly less than zero, and so the answer is never. You can also see this qualitatively that it's never the case that S4 executes before, an iteration of S4 executes before an iteration of S0, because the only iteration of S0 executes right in the beginning of the program. All right, so now we are gonna generalize this algorithm, we've already seen examples. And what is the algorithm that I've been using in all these examples? Well, the algorithm is the following. If I am interested in finding the precedence relation between two statements, S1 and S2, let S1 be in a D1 depth loop nest, and let S2 be in a D2 depth loop nest. And let's assume that these D1 and D2 share the D depth outer loops, which includes the meta variable loop that I used in my example. And clearly, because D1 and D2 have common number of loops, which is first the outer loops, D, then D must be less than equal to both D1 and D2. So now let's say that, you know, I want to, let's say there's an iteration instance, symbolic iteration instance I, because I equals I1, I2, I3, dot, dot, dot, ID1 for S1 because S1 was a D1 depth loop. And similarly, I have J1, J2, J3, dot, dot, dot, JD2, which I also call the vector J, which represents the iteration vector of statement S2. I want to ask the question when, what is the mathematical condition or what is the mathematical encoding of the relation I precedes, I of S1 precedes J of S2. And I say, you know, in my modeling, I say this happens if either, so in fact, I should say if, because there is some over-approximation, it's not if and only if. So, but if this is true, then definitely precedes, but there are other cases in which it can also proceed, but we are not considering them. So it's an over-approximation solution. So, I1, I2, dot, dot, dot, ID is first, if either the first D loop nest, if I just look at the outer D iteration variable values, if they proceed the outer loop iteration variable values of J, then definitely I precedes J, right? If the first D dimensions of I precedes the first D dimensions of J, and where D is the common outer loop iterations, then clearly I also precedes J because in the common iterations, you know, S1's iteration is operating before S2's iteration. Or I1, I2, I3, ID is equal to J1, J2, J3, GD, which means it's the same iteration of the outer loop. For example, the M is the same, or the M, I is the same, or M, I, J is the same. So, or they are the same, and S1 appears lexically before S2, okay? In the program order, in the program tree that I have drawn, S1 appears lexically before S2. And so that's the relax. Now, either in the outer loops, the iteration space is iteration vector precedes the other iteration vector, or the iteration vectors are equal, and S1 appears lexically before S2 in the program order, as we have already kind of represented using a hierarchical program tree. So, just to show this represented, you know, more pictorially, let's say S1 was somewhere here in the loop nest depth, and S2 was somewhere here in the loop nest depth. If this is the depth of D, S2, which is D2, if this is the depth of S1, which is D1, then D basically represents the common loop iteration. So, in this case, maybe D would be equal to D1, right? So, D basically represents the common loop iterations of common loop nest of S1 and S2. And we basically say that I1 of S1 precedes I2 of S2. If either the top D dimensions precede, or top D dimensions of I1 precede top D dimensions of I2, or the top D dimensions are equal, and S1 appears lexically before S2 in the program order. All right, so now the only question, so we have reduced the bigger problem of I1 of S1 precedes I2 of S2 to a smaller problem, which is the top D dimensions of I1 precede the top D dimensions of J1, or I2 I've been using. The top D dimensions of I precede the top D dimensions of J. And question is how do I model this precedence operator? Well, this is just R, because it's the same amount, it's the same loop nest. We can just use the lexicographic ordering to solve this. All right, so this is basically going to be either I1 is less than J1, or I1 equals J1 and I2 is less than J2, or I1 equals J1 and I2 equals J2 and I3 is less than J3, and so on. Finally, I1 equals J1 and I2, and all the way till IN minus one, equals JN minus one and IN equals JN. And this should probably be where I say N equals D here. It's I'm using N equals D. And so this is the mathematical modeling of the precedence constraints for this. We already know the precedence constraint for equal to, which we had on the previous slide. And plus we will have a bunch of other data dependence constraints that we already are aware of. For example, FII plus small fi equals FJJ plus small fj, and the B constraints for BII plus BI greater than equal zero and similarly for J. And now I can basically give all these bunch of constraints that I've collected to a solver. If the solver says these constraints are not satisfiable, that basically means that I don't need to draw an edge in the program dependence graph because these constraints are not satisfiable, which means there is no such iteration that basically occurs before, of S1, which occurs before the iteration of S2, such that the two were data dependent. And if the solver says, yes, there is a solution and maybe it gives you some example of a solution, then you basically draw an edge in the PDG. I would like to point out that in this formulation, there are a lot of disjunction operators, the OR operators, and typically we use the integer linear programming solver to solve such constraints, which cannot handle the disjunction operator. So what we do is basically we kind of split this whole constraint. If there were n different, or n is equal to d, if there were n different disjunctions in my hierarchical time constraints, then I create n different integer linear programs and I submit it to an off the shelf integer linear programming solver. And if any of them give returns a possible solution, then I know that the entire set of constraints is satisfiable, that's the meaning of disjunction. And so I draw a PDG edge if any of them is satisfiable. If none of them are satisfiable, then I don't draw the PDG edge. And so this is my algorithm to construct the PDG. As you can see, just the construction of the PDG requires a lot of constraint solving.
