Title: Compiler Design Module 124 12: Running time of Andersen's pointer analysis algorithm
Video ID: ARdBOLL2F10
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

So now we are ready to discuss the running time of Anderson's algorithm for point analysis. So and when we talk about running time, we are going to obviously make some approximations. We are going to do a worst case analysis of what can, you know, how much time it can take and also, you know, what is the typical time that an analysis may take. So for example, you know, the first thing we want to fix is the n, which we are going to take as a program size. We are going to say what is the running time of Anderson's algorithm for a program of size n, where n could be the number of statements in the program. And so we are going to also from that get or assume that the number of abstract objects in the program are also order n. So roughly the number of allocation statements in the program grows with the size of the program. And also, you know, if you're doing a field sensitive analysis or things like that, then maybe the, you know, the number of fields, et cetera, get multiplied and so with the number of allocation sites in terms of how many different possibilities there are. And so that's also order n. And then this, roughly the number of abstract objects will form the number of nodes in the points to graph, which we are going to assume is order n. Further, an instruction may generate constraints of the form. So if it's a copy instruction, p equals q, then we're going to say that the whatever q may point to p may point to. In other words, the points to set p of the points to set of p is a superset of the points to set of q. And I'm using this shorthand notation is just representing the points to set of p using p and the points to set of q using q and set p is a superset of q. Similarly, the points to set of star p is a superset, you know, for a for a for an assignment of the form star p equals q, the points to set of star p must be a superset of the points to set of q. So which means that whatever q may point to, all those things now start p may also point to. And similarly, the dereference, which we say that, you know, if it is an assignment of form p equals star q, then anything that star q may point to now p can point to. And the number of such statements in the program is also order n, because after all, most of the program will be made up of statements that look resemble either assignment, copy or dereference. And so there will be order n such constraints as well. So with that, let's move on. So the Anderson's algorithm involves identifying a fixed point solution for these order n constraints of these types. Right. And OK, so that's that's one. Whenever a constraint is not satisfied, we relax the current solutions. For example, if I if I'm doing a flow insensitive analysis, if I kind of look at the copy statement, then I check whether this constraint is already satisfied or not. If it is not satisfied, then I add elements to the points to set of p such that they start at the using the points to set of q such that this constraint starts getting satisfied. So we and this this addition of. Elements to the points to set of p is is called relaxing the solution. Recall that the addition of these abstract objects from the points to set of q to the points to set of p is is basically similar is is equivalent to saying that we are adding edges to the points to graph. And recall that there could be the points to graph as order n nodes because that's the number of abstract objects. And then because there are order n nodes, they could be as at most order n square edges in a graph. Now, relaxing involves growing the points to set for some pointers. For example, I may want to grow the points to set of star p using this constraint. That basically is equivalent to saying that we are adding edges to the points to graph. So now, next, we're going to see how much time will take to perform this relaxation and we're going to look at each of these constraints individually and see how much time in the worst case it may take to relax any one such constraint. But before I do that, I want to point out that the points to set of any single pointer, for example, the points to set of q or the points to set of star p can contain at most order n elements or an order n abstract object because that's the total number of abstract objects anyway. In other words, the number of outgoing edges in the points to graph of a node can be at most order n because the number of total number of nodes in the points to graph is order n. So, OK. So with that, let's start. If I relax the copy instruction, so if I have to relax this constraint using this constraint p is a superset of q, this may involve the addition of order n edges, I claim. So why? Because anything that belongs to q, so anything that q may point to or all the outgoing edges of q, we need to also ensure that p also has outgoing edges to those elements. And q may point to up to order n abstract objects or in other words, q may have order n outgoing edges. So all those outgoing edges need to be checked or inserted to the outgoing edges set of p. And so that could be, in the worst case, order n time. Now, similarly, let's look at another constraint. Relaxing star p is a superset of q, may require the addition of order n square edges, I claim. So let's understand this. So q may have order n outgoing edges. Similarly, p may have order n outgoing edges. But for each of the outgoing edges of p, we need to add everything in the outgoing edges of q to the outgoing edges of whatever p was pointing to. In other words, for all l belonging to q, outgoing edges of q, for all m belonging to the points to set of p or the outgoing edges of p, we need to add l to m. And because there are two quantifiers here and each of them could be at, in the worst case, order n, I may need to add order n elements to each set where the number of sets on which I need to add those order n elements could be also order n. So making a total of order n square extra edges. So just to clarify this. So let's say q was pointing to order n stuff. p was pointing to order n stuff. Then each of these elements here, let's say 1, 2, 3, need to get added to a. Similarly, each of these elements, 1, 2, 3, need to be added to b. And each of these elements, 1, 2, 3, need to be added to c, and so on. And so that's order n square. Similarly, relaxing p as a superset of star q may require addition of order n square edges. And this is a similar argument. q may point to order n abstract objects, which in turn, each of which may in turn point to order n abstract objects, making a total of order n square things that it may point to. I mean, although the total number of abstract objects that they may point to obviously cannot be more than order n, because after all, the total number of nodes in the graph are at most order n, but you need to check that each of those outgoing edges, two-hop outgoing edges need to be checked for making sure that this constraint is satisfied. And that itself is an order n square operation. And so relaxing this p as a superset of star q for the dereference may require the addition of order n square edges. So to summarize, the worst-case time to relax the solution so it satisfies one constraint, and these two are the culprits, the second and third constraints, can be at most order n square. So the worst-case time can be order n square to just relax one constraint. And the number of constraints that we need to relax in the worst case could be order n, and each of them needs to be checked for relaxation at least once. And so the worst-case time can be order n cubed. Now this is a very rough analysis, and a more precise and kind of clearer analysis is available in this paper on the complexity analysis of static analysis by David McElester, where he has a theorem which says the fixed-point solution can be obtained in order n cubed time using Anderson's algorithm. Now I want to point out that although we've been talking about the worst-case time being order n cubed, first of all, order n cubed is a very disappointing time because programs can be very large, thousands to millions of lines of code, and an order n cubed time complexity is often not going to work for many programs. And if you're doing a compilation, if a compilation is going to take hours or days because of the order n cubed time complexity, that's a non-starter. So Anderson's algorithm, for this reason, is not all that practical for the purposes of compilation, but it is often used for other purposes, like verification or program analysis, et cetera. We're going to see in our next module a faster alternative to Anderson's algorithm. But the other thing here to point out is that even though I've been doing the worst-case analysis, even the average of the typical case analysis is roughly quadratic to cubic, because after all, I need to relax order n constraints, irrespective, and each constraint, even if I assume that it takes on average order n time, then it's already order n squared time complexity. If not cubic, it's already quadratic. So the typical time is quadratic to cubic. The worst case can be cubic. And even quadratic is very bad. So if you have a million line program, quadratic time is also going to take hours or more than that. And so for that reason, it would be OK if the worst case was cubic, but the average or the typical case was linear. But in this case, even the typical case is at least quadratic. And so for this reason, Anderson's algorithm is considered one of the heavyweight or expensive algorithms to do for point analysis.
