Title: Compiler Design Module 150  : Splitting Loops to Eliminate Tests for Synchronization Free Parallelis
Video ID: apbvyVVYPpA
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

Last time we were talking about how we could remove the empty iterations or tighten the loop bounds. And this is the solution that we have after tightening the loop bounds for the running example that we've been using. So for p from minus 101 to 100, for i from max of 0, p to min of 100, 101 plus p, for j equals max of 0, i minus p minus 1 to min of 100, i minus p. So notice that the maximum number of iterations of the inner most loop is actually going to be only 2. And if p equals i minus j minus 1, s1. If p equals i minus j, s2. Now this is almost as good as it can get except that we have a lot of unnecessary tests or comparisons or predicate checks. For example, when we have different values of j, we are basically checking whether p equals i minus j minus 1 repeatedly. And similarly, we are checking if p equals i minus j repeatedly. And the reason these checks need to be here, for example, is because s1 and s2 have distinct polyhedrons, polyhedra and represent distinct polyhedra. The iteration spaces of s1 and s2 represent distinct polyhedra. And when I take the union, I get a non-convex space. And then when I actually create the loop nest, I basically identify the tight polyhedron that encloses both the individual polyhedra such that it encloses it in the tightest possible way. And now when I do that, I need to have these predicates. And once again, the problem is occurring because there were two different polyhedra because of two different statements, two or more different statements that had to be enclosed in a larger polyhedra. And when you do that, you get some extra iterations for each statement, which you didn't really want. And so you had to do these tests. Now, one way to get rid of these tests. Now, one question is, does it matter if there are these extra tests? You may say, oh, it's only order one extra computation. But as a compiler, we would ideally like to also remove these extra order one tests that we have in our code. And you're going to do that at the cost of potentially duplicating some of the code. So first of all, what is the problem? The problem is that there are these tests that are happening on every iteration. And these are meant to be there so that you can remove the extra iterations that are being caused because of the larger enclosing polyhedron that we have created through the loop nest. So for example, for the statement one, I need to check if P equals I minus J minus one. This test is going to evaluate to true for most of the iterations, except for certain corner case iterations for which it was only S2 that had to run. Similarly, the test for S2 is going to evaluate to true for most of the iterations, except for those corner case iterations for which S1 had to run. And so can we do better? Can we eliminate these tests on every iteration and specialize the code such that we don't have to do these tests on every iteration? So that's the topic of discussion today. So the idea is the following that we are going to split the partition space and duplicate code. So for example, I'm going to split the partition space of the topmost loop or on P. So for example, I can say, oh, let's divide minus 101 to 100 between two or three or four parts, such that for each part, I'm sure that either only S1 is going to execute or both S1 and S2 are going to execute or only S2 is going to execute. And keep doing this for each inner loop. And when I split, I basically create two different versions of the same loop. And so that's why I say that it amounts to code duplication. If code size is not an issue, this actually saves time because it removes some unnecessary tests on every iteration. So the algorithm that we're going to follow to do this is we're going to start with the outermost loop. For example, in this case, that's P and split the iteration space of the outermost loop such that each partition enables a different set of statements. It's different from the neighboring partitions. So for example, if there were N different statements, then the first partition may be enabling the first N minus one statement. The second maybe the second N minus one and so on and so forth, or some other kind of different partition. But the partition should be such that the neighboring partitions enable different statements from the current partition because otherwise you could have merged the two partitions into a single partition. And so we split such that each partition enables a different set of statements, different from neighboring partitions. And once we do that, then we generate the code accordingly. And once we are done with the outermost loop, then we basically see now we get multiple versions of the outermost loop. And maybe some of those versions of the outermost loop, we want to specialize further, we want to split further. And then we can split it on the inner loop. For example, in this case, it could be the I loop. And finally, we may want to split on the innermost loop in this example, that is the J loop. So let's look at an example on how this can be done. I'm not going to show the entire example, but basically show how a compiler may go about doing this in an automated fashion such that it is also methodical and meaningful. So if I look at the polyhedral space, so I'm going to first try and split on the outermost loop, which is iterating on the variable P. And so if I look at the polyhedron space of S1, recall that the whole problem is occurring because there are two statements which have different polyhedra and the loopness is basically an enclosing larger polyhedra that encloses the union of the two polyhedra. And so if I look at individual polyhedrons, so example, I look at the polyhedron formed by the iteration space of S1, I basically have these set of constraints. I say I is greater than equal to zero and I is less than equal to 100. J is greater than equal to zero and J is less than equal to 100. And then I also have the constraint that P equals I minus J minus one. Now once I use the Fourier Modescale method to project on P, this basically gives me the constraints that P should be between minus 101 and 99. Notice that these constraints of minus 101 and 99 are only for S1 polyhedron and it is for this reason that these constraints are different from my original solution which is from minus 101 to 100. So minus 101 to 100 actually has one extra iteration which is P equals 100 from the polyhedron of S1 and recall that P equals 100 is meaningful for S2 but not for S1 where S1 doesn't execute when P equals 100. So in any case, for S1 we get this projection on P from minus 101 to 99, which is actually a subset of the entire projection of both S1 and S2 on P. Similarly, I can do the same exercise for S2 and once again I have the same set of constraints, I between zero and 100, J between zero and 100 and P equals I minus J. So this is the difference between the previous S1 and S2 where it was I minus J minus one and here it is I minus J and when I project this polyhedron using the Fourier Modescale method, I get P is between minus 100 and 100. Once again, notice that minus 100 to 100 is different from minus 101 to 100 because there's one less iteration in this projection which is P equals minus 101. So these are the two projections, one for S1, one for S2 on P. What does it tell us? How can I partition my space of P such that each partition basically executes a different number of, enables a different number of statements. So clearly for iteration, for value of P equals minus 101, it is only S1 that gets executed. For everything between minus 100 and 99, both S1 and S2 are getting executed and for P equals 100, only S2 is getting executed. So that naturally gives us three partitions and the compiler can use an automatic method to basically use these two projections and basically divide it into intervals such that each interval basically enables a different set of statements. So from this, we get three partitions. The first partition is just the point minus 101. So I'm just representing as a closed range, minus 101 to minus 101. The second partition is from minus 100 to 99 where both S1 and S2 are going to execute. In the previous partition, only S1 was going to execute and then we have a third partition which is plus 100 to plus 100 where only S2 is going to execute. And now once we have divided the topmost loop into these three partitions, we can specialise the code for each partition because now we don't need to actually do testing. We are sure that for this partition, it's only S1, for this partition, it's both S1 and S2 and for this partition, it's only S2. And because we don't need to do any testing now, we can actually make the code faster because we can remove the if statements because of that. So I'm going to show you how we could generate the code for each of these partitions. So partition 1 which I'm going to call this partition 1 which is minus 101, partition 2 which is everything between minus 100 and 99 and partition 3 which is plus 100 to plus 100. So here is the code for partition 1 on P. Notice that it's a singleton partition, so I can just say P equals minus 101. I don't even need a for loop for this partition and I'm going to find out that when P equals minus 101, I can only take one value which is 0. When I project the polyhedron of S1 at P equals minus 101, I'm going to find that it's only one value that I can take which is 0. Actually, there's only one value that J can take which is 100. Once again, I'm just using the Fourier Modeskin method to project the S1's polyhedron at the point when P equals minus 101. And this is the code for my S1's body which is Xij plus equals Yi minus 1j. And so this is the code. This is a simplified specialized code for partition 1 which looks much faster than the code that we had earlier but this is just for partition 1. In fact, I can also do constant propagation here to basically replace i with 0 and j with 100 and so on. So that's the code for partition 1 in which case it was a singleton partition so I could completely get rid of the loop but this is only the outer loop and then also the inner loops basically projected to singleton elements as well in this particular example. It is not necessary that if the outer loop is a singleton element then the inner loops will also project to singleton elements but in this case it just happened to be like that. Now let's look at the second partition which is this partition from minus 100 to 99. And here it is not a singleton partition so I basically have a loop just like before and say for p equals minus 100 to 99. Notice that the bounds are different. In my original code it was minus 101 to 99. This time I have minus 100 to 99 and everything else remains identical. What have I gained? What I have gained is that I'm pretty sure that for these values of p I can be sure that I don't need to I mean you know maybe I don't need to check for if p equals i minus j minus 1 because these conditions are always going to be true. And finally there is the partition 3 which is p equals 100 comma 100 so I say p equals 100 and if I project on p equals 100 I get i equals 100 project on i and then when I project on j for p equals 100 and i equals 100 I get j equals 0 and this is the body of s2. So this is the body of s2 and that's my partition 3. So partition 1 and partition 3 are really simple. Now let's look at partition 2 in more detail and maybe we want to specialize it further. We are making progress in the sense that we are removing the tests, eliminate the predicates on these statements and making the and that's hopefully making the code faster at the cost of increased code size. Okay so this is partition 2 on p and notice that we had p equals minus 100 to 99 and then everything else was identical to my original loop nest. Now I can do the same thing same trick on i so this time I want to project on this particular loop which is on i and once again I'm going to look at to the two different polyhedra one is because of s1 and one is because of s2. If I look at the polyhedron due to s1 I have p is between minus 100 and 99. Notice that these are the new revised bounds that are caused by partition 2. For example it doesn't include minus 101 it doesn't include plus 100 all right i is greater than equal to 0 and i is greater than equal to p that's coming from i equals max of 0 comma p i is less than equal to 100 and i is less than equal to 101 plus p that's coming from min of 100 comma 101 plus p j is greater than equal to 0 and j is greater than equal to i minus p minus 1 that's coming from this the innermost loops lower bound and j is less than equal to 100 and j is less than equal to i minus p that's coming from the upper bound of the innermost loop and finally for S1 we also have the relation that p equals i minus j minus 1. So what do I want to do? I want to project this polyhedron on i for a given value of p so you know because i is the inner loop not the outermost loop it's a second outermost loop I can assume that p value is available it is the value of p is available and now the remaining polyhedron after I take out p is a two-dimensional polyhedron on i and j and I want to project this remaining polyhedron on i and j on the dimension of i and I can just use the Fourier Modeskin method to do that and I claim that this is what these are the constraints that I'm going to get I'm going to say i is greater than equal to 0 i is greater than equal to p plus 1 notice that this is tighter than what we had earlier we had i is greater than equal to p but now I'm going to be able to say i is greater than equal to p plus 1 that's actually coming from this constraint that p equals i minus j minus 1 which is true only for S1 right so the reason I'm getting tighter bounds for i is because I'm only considering S1 and not S2 similarly i is less than equal to 100 and i is less than equal to 101 plus p so the upper bound actually remains similar as before but the lower bound has become tighter it's gone from p to p plus 1 so this is the new range for i when I only consider S1 now I can do the same exercise for S2 so this is the this is the range of the polyhedron for S1 now I do a similar exercise for S2 and once again I'm going to end up with three intervals one where only S1 executes one where both S1 and S2 execute and one where only S2 executes just like we had done for the outermost variable p and we are going to specialize the code for each of these partitions so for S1 we have basically identified this range i is greater than equal to max of 0 comma p plus 1 notice that this is different from max of 0 comma p it's tighter and less than equal to min of 100 comma 101 plus p this is for S1 now I do the same thing for S2 and I'm not going to show you the working but I claim that you're going to get something like the following that for S2 to execute it must be true that i is greater than equal to max of 0 comma p notice that that's actually similar to the original loop but different from S1's lower bound and min and less than equal to min of hundred comma hundred plus p now I want to point out that unlike when when we were talking about p where we just had greater than equal to and less than equal to here we also have max and min because we have this variable this this quantity called p which is kind of can be different across different iterations of the outer loop now once I do that I mean one way to write i is greater than equal to max of 0 comma p plus 1 is basically write it as two different inequalities i is greater than equal to 0 and i is greater than equal to p plus 1 similarly i is less than equal to min of some x y a comma b is i is less than equal to a and i is less than equal to b this is just shorthand for writing a conjunction of multiple inequalities notice that this this this kind of shorthand only works when you have max with greater than equal to and min with less than equal to you can't kind of have min with greater than equal to in which case it would no longer remain a conjunction of inequalities here are the partitions that are created one is from max of 0 comma p to p so if I just look at all the inequalities that are created I basically get three partitions one is from max of 0 comma p to p including both max and 0 comma p and p so in other words I should be greater than equal to 0 and I should be greater than equal to p and I should be less than equal to p so you know once again I'm just using max as a shorthand for the fact that there are two conjunctions here one is i is greater than equal to 0 and i is greater than equal to p and the other upper bound is i is less than equal to p similarly on the on the right hand so in the middle I have from max of 0 comma p plus 1 so that's coming from the lower bound of s1 to min of 100 comma 100 plus p that's coming from the upper bound of s2 so this is the range this middle range is going is the range where both s1 and s2 is going to execute the first one is where only max of 0 comma p to p is the one which only s2 will execute and not s1 because s1 is actually needs to be also greater than equal to p plus 1 and not just p and finally we have a third partition which is 101 plus p to min of 100 to 101 plus p so once again I'm using min as a shorthand for saying that whenever i is greater than equal to 101 plus p and i is less than equal to 100 and i is less than equal to 101 plus p so these are the three partitions I have created and I claim that the first and the third partition can have at most one element and sometimes they will have zero elements depending on the value of p and the middle range would have more than could potentially have one or more elements and so I need a for loop so this is very similar to what we had seen when we were partitioning on the outer loop of p as well and I'm not going to show you the entire code generation I mean it becomes I mean it is pretty evident from here on I hope but basically the way it works is you have the outer loop for partition 2 which is from p from minus 100 to 99 is the partition 2 on p and now we are going to generate code for partition 1 on i of partition 2 on p right because we first partitioned on p and then we took the partition 2 which was the complicated one and then partitioned on i for that particular partition on p and so here we basically have this partition which is the first partition which goes from max of zero comma p to p and in fact if you look at this expression for i equals max of zero comma p and i less than equal to p it basically means that i if p was greater than equal to zero then i equals p if p is not greater than equal to zero then basically this loop is not even executed in other words if p was less than zero this loop is never executed okay so so I can actually replace this with just a if statement if p is greater than equal to zero then execute one iteration in which i can be just equal to p and then I basically you know do the substitution for the projection of the remaining elements of the polyhedron which are j on on j and basically find the values and then print the statement s2 just like we had done when we were projecting for the outermost variable p so that's what you know that's that's what my projection is going to look like for partition 1 on i of partition 2 on p notice that there is no loop in this particular partition on i I mean there's a loop on p but there's no loop on i we just have an if condition and the if condition is actually on p and not on i and if p is greater than equal to zero then we execute one iteration of s2 in that iteration i should be equal to p now there's the second one which is the more complicated one which is the second partition on i on but so this is actually partition 2 okay so I'm just showing the original code again and now this time I want to look at the second partition which is max of 0 comma p plus 1 to min of 100 comma 100 plus p and this is the original partition 2 on p which was actually from max of 0 comma p which notice that actually loser than max of 0 comma p plus 1 and it goes to 100 comma 101 plus p whereas we want to have stop it at 100 comma 100 plus p and for this particular partition we know that both s1 and s2 will execute and so what I can do is I can just tighten the partition so now it becomes partition 2 on i partition 2 on i of partition of p and and so what I get is max of 0 comma p plus 1 so I just tightened the lower bound and I also tightened the upper bound from 101 plus p to 100 plus p and now everything else in the inner loop remains the same what have I gained in this process well because I know that the inner loop these exec both s1 and s2 are guaranteed to execute maybe I also want to you know do a similar analysis on J but after all this what I'm going to get is that this these conditions are always going to evaluate to true for some values of J once I do that I'm not going actually going to do this on J as well I think you get the idea of what the algorithm that can be implemented in a compiler in an automatic way but basically what's going to happen eventually is that you're going to be able to get rid of these tests even for the middle partitions where you have a loop anyway on this one the first and the third partitions or every loop we are anyway able to get rid of the condition because it's only a singleton there but element there iteration there but even in the middle one we will be eventually able to get rid of these checks and we would be able to simply substitute J with the corresponding expression in terms of i and p for example I could say xii comma i minus p minus 1 and xyi minus 1 comma i minus p minus 1 and so on and I can actually get rid of the inner loop after I have done all this kind of specialization so what I'm basically doing with all this thing is basically getting rid of loops wherever possible getting rid of if conditions which are predicates and finally just representing J in terms of i and p and overall that's going to basically eventually give me a two loop depth we're not going to have the inner loop anyway the inner loop in our original solution was only had two iterations but even you know aesthetically speaking you will only see not a triple loop nest but a double loop nest only just like the original program except that it would be better optimized for locality and parallelism on the outer loop iterations finally so this is what so finally basically we need to do the code generation for partition 3 on i which is this partition from 101 plus p to min of 100 comma 101 plus p this is what the code looks like so this is partition 3 on i and this is what the code looks like once again I can simplify this because this basically means if 101 plus p is less than equal to 100 then it execute one iteration otherwise it executes zero iteration and so I can actually simplify this to saying if p is less than equal to minus 1 I should set i to be 101 plus p and then execute s1 with these values of i and j just project on i and j using Fourier mode scan and then execute the corresponding iteration for s1 in this case so for the third iteration partition it was s1 for the first partition it was s2 and for the middle partition it was both s1 and s2 by doing this code specialization and elimination of tests I have been able to remove some unnecessary tests I have been able to remove some unnecessary for loops which were anyway going to be executing on very small iteration space example the innermost loop on j and I have been able to you know improve the readability of the code perhaps actually readability should not matter because it's a compiler generated code so hopefully you don't want to read it importantly this is coming at some cost the cost is the increase in the code size caused by specialization of the code across each level of the loop iteration nest
