Title: Compiler Design Module 7 : Lexical Analysis High level Algorithm
Video ID: 6GvdZDnS2r8
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

Okay, so last time we talked about regular expressions in regular languages and They they fall under the category of formal languages to review if sigma is a set of characters It was called an alphabet then a language over sigma is a set of strings All right, and then we have some way of specifying what that set of strings is 

All right now We and then every language is associated with a meaning function Typically every language is the meaning function So we saw the language of regular expressions and we have each expression Had a meaning which means each expression represented a set of strings or each expression actually represented a language of its own Which was also called a regular language 


all right now we are interested in lexical analysis and The reason we discuss formal languages is because we want to specify a language To help our lexical analysis procedure in particular We want to specify the language that can help us recognize the different token tokens And token classes. All right, so let's take an example. For example, let's look at the token class keyword right, so You know for a language maybe all you know, we can list all the keywords. For example, the keywords are if or Then or else or while And so right to be more precise actually actually these are these are strings I should put them in quotes Also, so so I could potentially represent this language of keywords of the programming language keywords as a regular expression, right because Assuming my Sigma contains all these characters are A to Z and so on Then I can specify a keyword as a regular expression as following I can say okay I F By single quotes, I'm used I intend to say that there's the character I and there's the character F I'm going to omit the single quote from now on. I think it's so it should be clear. Hopefully Plus to represent that it could be either I concatenate with F or it could be E concatenated with L is S E plus then plus while And so So I can say that keyword The language of keywords can be represented by this regular expression as follows IF plus ELSE plus THEN plus WHILE plus dot dot dot, right? 


Okay similarly, let's look at the language of Constant integers in the language. All right, so I could say all right I could first define a language of Let's say a digit And say digit is 0 or 1 or 2 or 9 so these are all the 10 digits that I could potentially have in my number and Then I could say an integer The language of a constant integer is basically a digit followed by One or more digits. So this this thing here the dot here means concatenation Okay, so so this this would represent all kinds of num integers, right? For example, it would capture 0 0 1 1 100 132 or whatever Okay, so this would be the language of integers. I could represent the language of integers using regular expressions all right Okay Let's take another example. Let's say I want to represent a number 



Okay, before I do that, let's let's look at white space So I want to say that there is some amount of white space and I want to emit either emit a single token For the entire white space or completely ignore the white space during a lexical analysis So I could say okay a white space is nothing but a space character or a new line character represented by backslash in or a tab character represented by backslash t and then I could put a Cleanest out on top of this. All right. Is this correct? Well, it's not totally correct because It also includes an empty string and we don't want the empty string to be in the white space So let me just fix this I'm going to define Another language I'm going to say let's say I'm going to define blank as These three characters and then I'm going to say white space is one or more blanks like it's a blank followed by blank star So I'll introduce a new notation here, which is blank Which is a plus, right? so a plus represents One or more occurrences of a Just like the cleaning star a star represents zero or more occurrences a plus represents one or more All right, so and a plus is just equivalence to a Followed by a star So a plus is just a shorthand for a followed by a star and I could in fact write white space as space Plus backslash in plus backslash t Plus all right. Okay. All right 


What about a number all right a number is different from an integer because it can also have a Decimal point in the middle. All right, but it can only have a single decimal point, right? It doesn't make sense for a number to have more than one decimal points and it could have zero decimal points Also, so a number a number is a generalization over an integer So, let's let's see how one would potentially represent an integer as a regular expression a number as a regular expression So once again, I would define digit and digit would just be zero one Notice that I'm just omitting the single quotes, but these are just consider these and these as characters and Say digits Is one or more occurrences of digits so this is a digit plus I would say okay, so there could be an there could be a fraction no part. That's a Optional fraction it may or may not be there And so I want to represent the language of the fractional part. I could say it begins with Dot and and then digits in one or more digits and Because it's optional I also want to say that The epsilon string is also Accepted by the optional fraction. This means that there was no option. There was no fractional part also notice that I'm putting these back These parentheses were which were not actually part of the regular language specification But you know just I'm just putting them for a better readability just to know what is grouped with what and so on All right, then maybe there is Exponent so languages will allow you to write numbers like 1e plus 2 right which basically means you know 10 to the power 2 or something like that right so so so that's possible and that's also optional and I could say Okay, so this is nothing but the character e to say what it's an exponent and then I could say it is followed by Either the character plus notice that this is the character plus and not the union operator because I'm putting it in single quotes Plus or the minus character so I could also you know represent e minus something to represent division and Then I could say or I could say you know, maybe there was nothing so I could say 1e 2 And even that is a nice number right? I mean he doesn't need to be followed either by plus or by minus It could just be followed by number in which case the plus is implicit. So here I'm going to say epsilon All right, so e is concatenated either with the plus character or with the minus character or with nothing and it's followed by digits So this little space here, but I'm just going to continue it here Say digits and then because it's optional the whole thing and plus epsilon So even the empty string is part of my exponent and finally my number Is Digits which means one or more digit followed by an optional fractional part followed by An optional exponent part. Okay, and so this here represents a regular language and it also represents a language that is used by common programming languages to represent an arbitrary number including decimals and Including the use of the exponent operator e All right. So with this we get some sense of how useful regular languages are 


There is some additional notation Associated with regular languages one of them we have already seen which is a plus. So a plus is nothing but a a star we already seen this another notation is a vertical bar B, which is just another way of saying a plus B All right. Sometimes in some context we may prefer the vertical bar Over the plus operator, but they mean the same thing All right, a question mark is nothing but a Plus epsilon, all right, so a question mark means either there's an a or there's nothing right? So that's that's a shorthand for a plus epsilon and we saw this kind of a pattern appearing when we were discussing the regular language for a number a Numeric constant to be more precise All right, then a to Z is just shorthand for all the Alphabets small case in this case in this example from a to Z and a to Z preceded by the character represents the complement. All right, so complement of all the characters between A and Z This is a shorthand notation that we can that we may find handy by discussing regular expressions in future 

All right So so what are we interested in doing right? We are interested in finding out So we have a stream of characters which represents the program at the source code program that the user has given us and we are interested in changing this stream of characters into a stream of tokens So how are we going to do that? Well, the idea is the following that we are going to Look at the stream of characters left to right and we are going to identify Token after token, right? So for example, we may take the first three characters and say okay This these three characters represent a numeric constant and so we're going to emit a numeric constant token All right Recall that a token is a token class which would in this case be numeric constant and a lexeme which would be the three characters that we just Took off from the stream All right, and we will keep doing this. All right now assuming that our Language of identifiers is our regular languages just like we saw earlier White space numeric constants identifiers keywords and so on We will now try to develop an algorithm that would that would implement our lexical analysis all right, so so the first step in doing this is we need to write a regular expression For each token class, right just like we did in the previous slide So we for example keyword white space identifier numeric constant and so on Notice that we are assuming here that these token classes can be represented as regular languages only then we can we can do this and and we said in the beginning that Most languages modern languages would use regular languages to denote the language of Tokens or token classes in the programming language today So so that it remains easy to do the parsing and lexing lexical analysis


 All right, so that's step number one step number two is to construct a giant union regular expression So what we do is we construct a giant union regular expression. So for example, we could say that so so It's a R which is the giant regular expression is equal to let's say keyword plus identifier plus numeric constant and so on right so you just say that okay, you know What is the what are all the possible tokens that are that that are accepted by? Language well, that's the language are and how is it formed? It just formed by unioning all the different token classes Belonging to that language. All right, or we could I mean I'm also going to refer to these different classes as it's just simply r0 r1 Or maybe just start with r1 r2 rn, okay So whatever are the token classes we don't really care Let's just say they are r1 r2 r3 rn then we just create a giant regular expression Which is just the union of all these different token classes Okay 
 
 Now we have an input x1 dot dot xn This is the sequence or string of characters that represents the program source code and now we will check Whether you know so notice that the string of characters has n characters in it So we're going to check whether the first I characters where I is anywhere between 1 and n belongs to one of the token classes and if so, we are going to All right, so so first of all, let's understand this check We're going to check whether x1 dot dot xi belongs to some token class rj for some j Right and if it does then We are going to emit the token corresponding to rj We're going to remove these characters x1 dot dot xi because they've been identified With the token belonging to rj and then we are going to repeat the process in step 3 until The input is fully consumed. All right, so that's that's our algorithm Okay, so so that sounds all right There are a couple of unanswered questions here. First of all, how do I check whether a string belongs to rj right the regular language rj now we have found we have so far studied Regular expressions and the languages that they represent but we haven't really studied how we are going to check whether a given string Belongs to a regular language or not and we're going to see that very soon the other question is What should be I right? How much should I? Bite off from the stream of characters in one go Right and this is this is related to the problem that we had example that we had seen in the very beginning of lexical analysis Let's say I have a stream of characters and the first two characters are greater than and equal to now Both greater than and equal to are themselves Token class, I mean valid lexemes and took and can be converted into tokens But in this case, we don't want them to be separate tokens. We want them to be a single token Isn't it? And and so how do we deal with that? How do we decide whether I should just take one or should that just should I take two or so on? And then similar example is equals versus double equal, right? So a single equal to represent the assignment operator in some languages like C but the double equal to represents the comparison equality comparison operator and when you see a double equal to you want to emit the token saying that this is a Comparison operator rather than you want rather than the assignment operator on the other hand when you see a single equal to then you want to emit a an assignment operator 
 
 
 Okay, so to resolve these unsquestions we're going to use some more rules so how much inputs to consume So here the idea is the following that we will always take the longer one, right? So this is how we resolve the problem. We'll always Whenever there's a choice we will always take the longer one so for example if There is double equal to then we're going to first take the single equal to but now we have a choice either we can emit a token for the single equal to sign or You know consume another character and then make a token for both characters to get the string double equal to now Whenever there's a choice like this, we are always going to prefer the one which has a Longer string which consumes a longer string. All right, so this is this is just a this is just a heuristic rule And this rule is also called maximal munch Idea is that you want to munch the biggest string that you can for a single token Or whatever you can all right, and and the reason this is a good heuristic is because this is also how typically Humans work, right? So for example, you know in the English language Let's say there's a word called in and then there's a word word called inform Right and you could potentially just stop at in but the moment you see that there is you know It's followed by the characters F or M Then you don't actually stop at in you say want to read the whole word as one right you want to kind of munch as much as possible for a thing and that's that makes it the Natural that makes the language naturally readable and so it makes sense. All right, so there's nothing there's nothing Technically fundamental about it. It's just a heuristic where we're going to just make a rule that wherever there is Ambiguity wherever there's choice, we're going to prefer the longer one All right, and that's going to resolve this this ambiguity in this case 
 
 
 All right Now there is another problem Which token to use so let's say, you know, there is if now if the the the word if the street the string if Can be both a keyword and an identifier right because it belongs to both the languages because in the identifier language We would probably say that it's a it's a sequence or string of characters and numbers It starts with a character and and if basically is you know is just fits in that language so that it's a valid so So there are two options here Either we could you know go into every kind of token class and explicitly remove the ones that do not belong to that belong to other token classes An easier and more kind of engineering friendly approach is to basically prioritize all right, so we're basically going to prioritize token classes So we're going to say that first try this token class and only if it doesn't match this token class go to The next one class and in this case we would say that keyword Token class has higher priority than the identifier token class. Okay, and And that's going to resolve this this issue for us this ambiguity for us. And so in this case the string if would be Recognized as a keyword and not as an identifier. Okay, so that's that's another ambiguity that that we can resolve and that would That would give us a you know desired result in such examples 
 
 
 And finally, what if no rule matches? So let's say I get a stream of characters where the first and characters There's nothing that's matching. All right Now one option here is to just throw a throw up through an error and say I couldn't The lexical analysis phase just didn't work. All right, but often you that's not a great way to kind of do this because Compilers are typically do error handling in a way where they try to recover from an error So, all right, there's an error because If you came across a string of characters, which does not match any of the token classes but maybe you can Skip over some of the characters and then again start lexing and parsing the rest of the string and that way You know, you can throw multiple errors to the programmer if if there were more in one go So that the programmer can deal and kind of address each of those errors simultaneously Also, it's possible that You know in sometimes the compiler is not used in this batch execution mode But a compiler is sometimes running as a part of an IDE an integrated development environment. We are maybe the compiler is running every Periodically, maybe every few seconds or something like that in which case the programmers typing the program Maybe the programmer has some error at the top of the program But right now the programmer is kind of writing something at the bottom of the screen and If there is an error at the top and the compiler just stops That's not a very satisfactory response a better response would probably be that the compiler identifies the error marks it for the user but then moves on and then Also kind of checks the later code which the programmer is currently writing. All right to handle such cases One approach one popular approach is to have a special error token class All right, this is this is this is This is another token class and and And what do we do here? What what string should belong to the error token class? Well, the answer is all the strings except that This token class would be the last in the priority order Last in the priority order So only after none of the other token classes matched the string will we go to the error token class in which case it will match the error token class, right and You may you know typically the error token class would just consume a single character from the string and then move to the next character and maybe it will generate multiple error tokens before it starts Lexing successfully lexing the other parts of the string 
 
 Okay, so so we have some idea of Lexical analysis and how it may proceed. There are still some missing pieces Like how do we check whether a string a string belongs to a regular language or not? We also don't know how So that's that's one thing one part that we're going to discuss next time To summarize regular expressions and a few rules resolve the ambiguities provide a way to do simple lexical analysis as we just saw and Good algorithms can achieve this in a single left to right pass. In fact the algorithm that we just saw Good was kind of a single left to right pass where you just consuming one character after another and And you require a few operations per character. Maybe two or three Operations and typically these operations involve memory
