Title: Compiler Design Module 185 : Hoare Logic Rules
Video ID: RXmaFcKBYrc
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

So we're going to go through the whole triple constructive proof or constructive rules one by one once again and this time instead of actually providing an encoding for a whole triple, I'm going to constructively specify what whole triples are valid and what whole triples can be constructed based on certain properties and this is going to be based on inference rules. So to understand what I mean, let's look at this first whole triple whole logic rule and these are the rules of the so-called whole logic. This is the assignment statement x colon equals e and if this is my program then this whole triple holds. What is this whole triple? Well, this time instead of saying arbitrary p and arbitrary q and then trying to provide a corresponding logical encoding, I'm actually doing a constructive proof. So I'm saying that for any p and any assignment, this whole triple holds and what is this whole triple? You know, the precondition is p where x has been replaced with substituted with e, x colon equals e, p. So notice that this is a constructive way of specifying what whole triple holds. So I'm saying that this whole triple holds for any assignment and any p. Notice that, you know, earlier our kind of way of specifying this property was something like this. We would say p x colon equals e q and this is equivalent to saying that p implies q such that x has been replaced with e. But this time I'm not, you know, I'm not using this. I'm actually using this way of specifying what whole triples hold and I'm saying that, you know, for any p, this holds. So for example, if, so I'm going to show you an example in the next slide. But the difference between this way of specifying what a whole triple means and this way of specifying what a whole triple means is that this is a constructive way or the, I'm saying that this is, you know, here is a way for any p and for any assignment, this whole triple holds. Here I was saying that given a whole triple, what does it mean? But you know, that's more like trying to understand what a whole triple means. This is, this kind of specification is basically, you know, a semantic meaning, giving a semantic meaning to a whole triple. Here I'm saying, oh, you know, this is a whole triple that definitely holds. And that's why I call it constructive. So let's, you know, before I look at an example, let me give you another composition, another rule for whole logic, which is again a constructive rule. I'm saying that if for some statement or some program C1, PC1R holds and for some other statement C2, RCQ holds for some PR and Q, then I can say that PC1 composed with C2Q holds. And this is our composition rule. And we have been seeing this rule, you know, we've been applying this rule implicitly all along. This time, I'm basically showing you a constructive rule, which shows, which basically says the same thing. So once again, if PC1R holds and RCQ holds, then PC1 semicolon C2Q holds, where C1 semicolon C2 represents the composition or the sequencing of the two programs. And this is also called the composition rule. So let's look at an example. Let's say this is my program. It is made up of two assignments. The first assignment is X colon equals 0. And the second assignment is X colon equals X plus 1. And I want to prove this whole triple, which is true as a precondition. A true precondition means that, you know, there's really no constraint, basically. It's the weakest possible precondition that you can have or weakest possible assertion that you can have. And the post condition is X equals 1. Now, it's easy to see that this whole triple are actually true. But how does, you know, how do we kind of show that this can be constructed from the two rules that I showed you in the previous slide? So this time I'm not going to basically show an encoding of this whole triple. I'm going to try to construct this whole triple from the two rules that I've shown you in my previous slide, which is the assignment axiom and the composition rule. So the first thing I'm going to do is I'm going to show, I'm going to use the first rule, the assignment axiom rule, across the second statement, let's say. I could have chosen the first statement also, but I guess it's, you know, because the assignment axiom says for any P and for any assignment, I know what holds for, what whole triple holds for that assignment. I know the P here. I just need to basically figure out what needs to come here. And so when I use the assignment axiom for the second statement, the second statement is X colon equals X plus 1. The post condition that I require is X equals 1. So both these things are coming straight away from here. And now the assignment axiom says that the whole triple holds where I, so this is basically, this forms my P in the assignment axiom. And this forms my C. And what goes before it is basically P where X has been replaced with E, right? And this C is basically nothing but X colon equals E. So E is nothing but X plus 1. And so here, P is X equals 1. And X colon equals E is X colon equals X plus 1. And so this whole triple can be constructed just using the assignment axiom that I showed you on the previous slide. Now if I look, if I kind of just simplify this, X equals 1 where X has been replaced with X plus 1 just becomes X plus 1 equals 1. Because after I substitute X by X plus 1, then I get X plus 1 equals 1. And that basically means X equals 0, all right? So that's basically X equals 0. And so from the assignment axiom, I know that I've been able to construct a whole triple which says X equals 0, X colon equals X plus 1, X equals 1. Precondition, program, postcondition. Now once I have the precondition of X colon equals X plus 1, I can kind of say, OK, now let's say that this was the postcondition of the first statement, then what is the whole triple that holds for the first statement? And once again, I'm going to apply the assignment axiom and say, OK, X equals 0 comes here. So that's coming from here, right? So this is coming from here. And then I say, OK, X colon equals 0. And from the assignment axiom, I say, so in this case, now this is my P, this is my X colon equals E, and so this is P, and this is the substitution X colon equals E. And so what is P? P is X equals 0. What is the substitution I want? That is X colon equals 0. So X has been substituted with 0, just comes 0 equals 0. And 0 equals 0 is a tautology. So that just becomes true, all right? And so this basically, this whole triple becomes, so from the assignment axiom, we've been able to construct the whole triple true, X colon equals 0, X equals 0. Similarly, from the assignment axiom, we've been able to construct the whole triple, X equals 0, X colon equals X plus 1, X equals 1. Now I can apply my composition rule. This becomes my P, which is true. X equals 0 becomes my R. The first statement becomes C1. X equals 0 is again R. X equals 1 becomes Q. And this second statement becomes C2. And so this becomes PC1R holds, and RC2Q holds. Then I know that PC1 semicolon C2Q holds. And so this coming from the composition rule. So this time, I am basically defining the whole logic constructively and saying what are the whole triples that can be constructed using a set of rules. So far, I've introduced two rules. And based on those two rules, I've shown that this whole triple can be constructed. And I've also shown a construction procedure for this particular whole triple, which involves the instantiation of the assignment axiom and that rule twice, and then involves an application of the composition rule. And that's done once. All right, so we understand what I mean by constructive specification of whole logic. Now let's look at another rule, which is the if-then-else rule, which is the third rule in our set of rules. The rule says if P and BC1Q holds, for some predicate P and some Boolean condition B, some program C1, and some predicate Q, and P and not B, C2Q holds. So P's are common, the B's are common, and the Q's are also common. The only difference is this time I have C2 instead of C1. Then if B, then C1 else C2Q holds. So these two B's are, so this B becomes the condition of the if-then-else, this C1 becomes the then body, and this C2 becomes the else body. So I'm basically saying that if P and B, C1Q holds, P and not B, C2Q holds, then P, if B, then C1, else C2Q holds. Once again, let's look at an example to understand this in more detail. So let's look at this program. If x is greater than 0, skip, else x colon equals minus x. This is a program that we have seen before, and the whole triple here that we are interested in, let's say, is the precondition is x equals x not for some, let's say, value x not, and the post-condition is x equals modulus of x not. It's easy to see that this whole triple actually holds, informally speaking, because if x is greater than 0, then nothing happens, and that's basically because x is already positive, so it's going to give you the same answer. But if x is negative, then you negate it to get a positive value, and so at the very end, you're going to get x equals modulus of x not. All right, so now I'm going to apply my if then else rule to show that this whole triple can also be constructed. So to be able to construct this whole triple, I need to first construct the corresponding whole triples for the then body and the else body. So here I show the whole triple that is required for the then body. The then body says x equals x not, skip, x equals mod x not, but not just x equals x not, but also I need to do and b, where b here is x greater than 0. So this whole triple that I require to be able to construct this larger whole triple is that p and b, so p is x equals x not, that's coming from here, b is x greater than 0, which is coming from here. C1 is skip, which is coming from here, and q is x equals modulus of x not, which is coming from here. And I want to show that if x equals x not and x is greater than 0, and I do nothing, so skip is nothing but a know-how, so I can even kind of, although I haven't specified a rule for skip, it's almost like saying that nothing happened, then x equals mod x not. And it's easy to see that this is true, and we'll use some kind of logic, and I'm using first order logic here, where first order logic, I mean that there can be quantifiers on values, but not quantifiers on higher order functions and things like that. So here we have x equals x not and x greater than 0, don't do anything, and that means x equals modulus x not. Can I prove this? I can prove this using first order logic, because x equals x not and x is greater than 0, so this just basically, because this is a skip operator, I really don't need my constructive rules, I just need to show that this implies this, and that's actually true, because x equals x not and x is greater than 0, that basically means both x and x not are positive values, that also basically means that x also equals modulus of x not. So it's easy to see that if p and b hold, then q holds, because the program is just a know-how, so I don't really need to really construct a whole triple, I can just use first order logic to prove this whole triple or this obligation. Now the second thing, the second proof obligation that I want to prove for constructing this larger whole triple is for the else body, and for the else body I say, so first of all, just in more detail, if I'm looking at the then, yeah, okay, so when I looked at the then body, then I would just add the skip instruction, and we just use first order logic, but when I look at the then body, else body, then I have this instruction called x colon equals minus x, so that forms my C2, and this time the whole triple that I want to construct is p and not b, so not b becomes x is less than equal to 0, I should say, so x is less than equal to 0, and x equals x not, that's p, not b is x is less than equal to 0, that's just not of x is greater than 0, C2 is x colon equals minus x, that's the program, and then q is x equals modulus of x not. Now I can, x equals x not and x is less than equal to 0 is the C2, x equals modulus of x not, can I construct this? It doesn't seem like we can construct this using the rules that we have so far, let's see what we can construct, what we can construct using the assignment axiom, because there's an assignment statement here, is that if x equals modulus of x not, that's my p, then if I just substitute minus x for x, then that this whole triple whole, so minus x equals modulus of x not, just to make this clearer, here I'm just doing p, x colon equals e, this thing here, minus x is e and this is p, and so what I've basically, I just copied p here, which is x equals modulus of x not, except that I replaced x with e and e is minus x, so that becomes minus x equals modulus of x not. So using the assignment axiom, I can construct this whole triple, but not this one, but it turns out that these two whole triples are actually identical, because if I just apply first order logic, I can show that minus x equals modulus of x not equals, x equals, is the same thing as x equals x not, and x is less than or equal to zero, because minus x equals modulus of x not basically means that x was negative, because modulus of x not is definitely positive, and if minus x is a positive number, then x must be a negative number, and also we know that, so minus x equals modulus of x not, actually these are not equivalent, but this is more like, this should be an implication, because it's possible that x not was a positive number, so I should have really said these imply here, all right? So I'm saying that if x equals x not, and x is less than or equal to zero, then minus x equals modulus of x not, but not the other way around, and so this is a problem, I mean from the assignment axiom, I was only able to construct this whole triple, but what I really require is this whole triple, and so far I don't know of a way of constructing this whole triple, because I wasn't able to construct one of the smaller whole triples, in particular I wasn't able to construct the whole triple that was required for the else clause, which is this whole triple, what I was able to construct was this whole triple, and these two whole triples are actually not equivalent, so I think I said they are equivalent just now, but they're actually not equivalent, because the precondition of this whole triple is different from the precondition of this whole triple. The precondition of this whole triple is actually stronger than the precondition of this whole triple, and it is easy to see that if this whole triple holds, then this will also hold, but so far we haven't discussed the rule which says that, and so far we won't be able to construct this whole triple as such, and so this whole triple cannot be constructed by the three rules that we have discussed so far. I'm going to discuss a fourth rule very soon that's going to allow us to reason about to be able to construct this whole triple as well. Similarly, here again, if I just kind of made the condition stronger and said x equals x naught and y equals one for some variable y, and this is the whole triple that I want to prove. Now it's easy to see that this whole triple is also true, because I only made the precondition stronger, I've added more constraints on y, but it's not possible to prove it because I'm not able to construct this whole triple. What I'm able to construct is this. So I'm able to construct this whole triple, I construct this, but I require this, and so I am stuck, and so basically that means that so far the three rules that we have discussed are insufficient to be able to construct this whole triple. So to be able to solve this problem, there is a fourth rule in the whole logic that I'm introducing, which is that if p implies p prime, for some predicates p and p prime, and p prime c q prime holds, and q prime implies q for some q prime and q. So notice that the whole triple that holds is p prime q c prime, but then there are extra predicates p where p is stronger than p prime, because p implies p prime, and q is weaker than q prime, because q prime implies q, then it also implies that p c q holds. And this is called the consequence rule, and this is going to be a very important rule as we go along. And basically it kind of says that if a stronger post precondition implies a post-condition, if a precondition implies a post-condition, then a stronger precondition will also imply a weaker post-condition. So if p prime c q prime holds, then a stronger post precondition p, c weaker post-condition q also holds. And to see this with an example, in this particular example, we were able to construct minus x equals modulus of x naught, x colon equals minus x, x equals modulus of x naught. Now let's assume that this is p prime, minus x equals modulus of x naught. This is q prime, x equals modulus of x naught. And now let's look at this particular statement here. Let's say this is p, and now this is q. Now it's clear that q prime implies q, because q prime is x equals modulus of x naught, so q prime implies q. p implies p prime, so you can see that's going to come from first-order logic. If x equals x naught, and x is less than zero, and y is equal to one, then that means that minus x equals modulus of x naught. It's easy to see that p implies p prime. Then we can show that p, c2, q also holds. And because we have been able to show that p, c2, q holds, earlier we had shown that p, c1, q holds. From that we are able to show that p, if b, we have been able to show p and not b, c2, q holds, to be more precise. Earlier we had shown that p and b, c1, q holds. From that we are able to show that p, if b, c1, else c2, q holds. So this way we have been using the four rules, the consequence rules was important here. Using the four rules, assignment axiom, composition rule. Actually in this example, we didn't really use the composition rule. In this example, we used the assignment axiom, the if then else rule and the consequence rule to be able to construct this particular whole triple. So in general, identifying the required p prime and q prime is the key. And we have seen earlier that for acyclic code, we can find pre-images. For example, we can just say, okay, if this is q, then I just find what is the corresponding pre-image here, which is just substitute e for x in q and that's the pre-image of q here and so on. And using that, we are able to find what p prime and q prime should be. In fact, here also p prime just came from that because we just took the pre-image of q, which was x equals modulus of x naught and took its kind of pre-image across this assignment statement and that became a p prime. And then we just had to show that p implies p prime and q prime implies q. And so in this particular example of if-then-else, which actually represents an acyclic program, it's possible to always find these p prime and q prime through this pre-image mechanism. But in general, this is going to become harder in the presence of loops, as we're going to discuss later.
