Title: Compiler Design Module 37 : Type Formalism
Video ID: 0ZQAM2vSCbk
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

So now we're going to discuss type checking in more detail. Before that, I want to point out that type checking and type inference are actually quite similar and because they rely on the same set of typing rules. Checking involves checking that, you know, if the program is obeying rules. So when you are doing type checking, you basically assume that all the types are available. So each and every expression, for example, in the program has been annotated with its respective type. And checking just involves checking, whether type checking just involves checking whether the annotated types obey all the typing rules or not. In contrast, inference is about filling in the missing types. So when you're doing type inference, some of the types are missing. And even you just use the same set of typing rules to fill those missing types. So as opposed to checking whether the type rules have been satisfied, if the type is not available, then you kind of infer that this is the type. Now, type inference may not be always possible because maybe the context is not enough to uniquely specify a type. For example, there could be multiple types that may follow, that may obey the rules and the type hasn't been specified. So we can't say which one it is. So in general, inference is not always possible, but often it is possible. Different languages have different designs with respect to whether they do type checking or type inference. For example, a language like C or C++ would have a lot of manually annotated types. So you are supposed to annotate, for example, the types of all the local variables, global variables, function arguments, functions, function signatures, classes, et cetera, class objects, and so on. But there are, for example, in C, if I just write one plus two, or if I write X plus Y, and let's say X was of type integer and Y was of type long, then there is some set of typing rules that is used to identify the type of X plus Y. Now, these types are, for the expressions, are not manually annotated, but inferred. So even C, for example, has type inference. More recently, C++, for example, has the auto keyword. You can use the auto keyword anywhere, but it's only a limited form of type inference. So sometimes the C++ compiler will be able to infer the type whenever you use auto. So auto is supposed to mean automatic type inference. So you say, instead of declaring a variable with its type, you say auto X and then use, and then sign it to something, and based on that, the type of X would be inferred. Now, so inference has limitations, and so sometimes it will work, sometimes it will not work. Languages, in fact, have very well-defined rules on when it will work and when it will not work. Just to take another example, functional programming languages like OCaml, they are largely based on inference of types and not checking of types. But sometimes even there, you need to manually annotate the types so that the compiler can disambiguate between multiple choices. So because type checking and type inference are so similar, or people often use these two terms interchangeably. In any case, both these, whether we talk about checking or whether we talk about inference, we are supposed to have a base set of typing rules based on which we will either check or infer. And we are going to now our next discussion, the next few modules will be about what these typing rules could look like. And we'll take some example language, and then we'll try to specify typing rules for that language to give us a flavor of what kind of typing rules are used in a typical language. So to be able to specify the rules, we are going to specify a type checking formalism. What is a formalism? It is just a formal notation used to specify typing rules precisely. Instead of just talking in English or something like that, we're going to define our own small logical language in which we are going to be able to say that what is of what type and so on. This formalism is going to take the shape of inference rules. And what is an inference rule? Well, it is some kind of a statement which looks like the following. If hypothesis is true, then conclusion is true, all right? And basically whenever I'm going to specify an inference rule, I will just specify the hypothesis and then specify the conclusion. I'm not going to use these extra words, if is true, then is true. That's just implicit in that notation. And so I just want to keep things, keep all the extraneous stuff out and just focus on the exact rule, all right? Okay, so for example, in our case of type checking or type inference, we will have rules of the type. If E1 has a certain type and E2 has some other certain type, then E3 would have a certain type, okay? So let's look at an example. So for example, I'm going to use this notation here, this notation here to basically say X colon T, which basically stands for X as type T, all right? Where X is an expression and type T is a type. All right, so for example, I may want to say if E1 is of type T, this represents a conjunction operator and so if E1 is of type T and E2 is of type T, so these two form my hypothesis, then, so this is the if then symbol, so you can read it as implies, but I can also read it as if this is true, then this is true. So this is the conclusion, then E1 plus E2 is of type T. Now I haven't said what is type T, maybe I may want to have different types, I may want to even have a rule that says T1, T2 and T3. This is just an example to explain the shape or the form of a typing rule. All right, I can even write this kind of a typing rule in this form and this will be my short form or notation for inference rules. Now this notation is basically something that is very popular because of historical reasons and people use it a lot, so it's good to understand this notation because we are also going to use similar notation. It's a very concise form of writing what we had here. Here, basically, firstly, we have this long line that separates the hypotheses which are appearing at the top of the line and the conclusion which is appearing below the line. The hypotheses are just separated by space or comma or new line or something like that, so I kind of omit the and operator. So in this case, it says also have this weird operator called the turn style operator, all right? So this operator, I'm calling it the turn style operator and the turn style operator basically should be read as it is provable that. So the hypothesis is saying if it is provable that E1 is of type T and if it is provable that E2 is of type T, then it is provable that E1 plus E2 is of type T, all right? Okay, so this is just another notation for this particular sentence that we had earlier. This notation is called an inference rule. This turn style operator stands for it is provable that and this long line here represents, separates hypotheses from conclusions. All right, so inference rule is basically looks like this, hypothesis one and hypothesis two and dot dot dot and hypothesis n, so a set of n hypotheses implies conclusion. In other words, if hypothesis one and hypothesis two and so on dot that hypothesis n hold, then conclusion holds, all right? That's what this inference rule looks like and this is the form of, this is the notation in which you're going to write the inference rule. If it is provable that hypothesis one is true, if it is provable that hypothesis two is true and so on, then it is provable that conclusion is true. Now this is a type rule. Okay, in addition to a type rule, we also basically have a notion of a name of a type rule. This is just to easily refer to a certain type rule. So we may have some name here, right? So when we're going to look at type rules, we're also going to give them a name so that it becomes easy to refer to them and so on. All right, so for example, type rules would have hypotheses of the form. It is provable that E is of type T, all right? So this is a single colon, all right? And actually even the conclusions are of the same form. So as we just saw, the hypothesis and conclusion that can include this form of a statement which is it is provable that some expression is of some type T. So to read it, it is provable that expression E is of type T. This is how you read this particular notation. It is provable that expression E is of type T, right? Okay, so now we are ready to start defining our first few typing rules. And before we do that, let me introduce you to the programming language for which I'm going to define the typing rules. Now I wanted to pick a programming language that is very close to the typically popular programming languages like C, C++, Java, Python, et cetera. And so our programming language is also like C, C++. However, we don't capture all the possible scenarios of C and C++. We're just looking at some subset of C and C++. Also, we kind of deviate from the actual semantics of C and C++ in our programming language a little bit, all right? For example, we basically assume that the declarations in new scope can only occur at the beginning of a new scope and cannot be interspersed with statements. This is like going back into the older version of C. This is just for simplicity. Our goal is to not define a full-fledged language, but just to look at some simplistic subset of a typical language and look at the typing rules that it supports so that we get a flavor of what the full-fledged language typing rules would be. Also, in our programming language, even statements represent values and are thus associated with types. So in a language like C or C++, a statement is not associated with any value. Expressions are associated with a value. In other words, expressions compute a value. Statements are just supposed to compute something, but they don't really return a value, right? So in our language, we're going to get rid of that assumption. Instead, what we're going to do is we're going to consider statements as also expressions, all right? So we're not going to make a distinction between statements and expressions. And every, both statements and expressions will be, I'm just going to use the term expressions from now on. So every expression will have a value, including expressions that, for example, end with a semicolon or something like that. Or if I have a list of statements, I'm going to call that a single expression. So for example, the body of an entire function can be thought of as an expression, all right? Whereas in the original C and C++ languages, the body of a function would be called a statement. So this is just a deviation from C, C++ semantics to be able to show some interesting ways, typing rules in these environments. Okay, further, I'm going to assume that this language is object-oriented, and it has the typical subtyping relation based on derived types and base types, just like the example we just saw. Also, I'm going to assume one more fact that the void type is a supertype of all types. So I'm going to assume that everything is a derived type of the void type, or every other type is a derived type of the void type. For example, the int type, the integer type in C, the int type is, I'm going to assume that it's a subtype of void, right? So what is a value of type void? It's a value that cannot be used for anything. For example, you can do plus on an integer, right? Or you could do concatenation on a string. What can you do on void? You can't do anything. But all the other types, I'm assuming that they are kind of a subtype of the void type, because you can do more things with those subtypes, but I'm just going to assume that they are all descending or deriving from this base type, universally based type called void. And the void type really has no operations, no legal operations on it. Okay, why am I doing this? Well, it makes some of the discussion easier. We don't have to take special cases and so on. Also, it does represent some type systems, some real world type systems, not CC++ type system, but some other type systems of real programming languages. So it's good to kind of look at this kind of scenario as well. Okay, so let's look at our first typing rule. The first typing rule says, if I is an integer literal, so what is an integer literal? Well, any constant like one, two, three, or one, seven, eight, nine, or six, four, five, or whatever. So if it is an integer literal, and recall that we already have, using our lexing phase and all that in our abstract syntax tree, we've already identified all the integer literals explicitly. So if I is an integer literal, then it is provable that I is of type int. All right, so this is a typing rule, and I also give it a name, and that's the name called int. So notice that I'm assuming here that int is a type, and that it is in a CC++-like language. And the precondition says I is an integer literal. It's easy to check because in my abstract syntax tree, I already have that kind of information. Then it is provable that I is of type int. So now this is a typing rule. I can use it either for type checking or for type inference. Typically, for example, in a language like C, we don't really explicitly say that this is, if I just write one, two, three, it's kind of implicit that this is an integer. And that's because the compiler is doing a type inference based on this particular rule. All right, okay. But you're also welcome to actually annotate and say that this is a type int, and in which case the compiler would just type check, and that's it. Okay, now here's another typing rule. If it is provable that E1 is of type int, and it is provable that E2 is of type int, then it is provable that E1 plus E2 is of type int. I'm going to call this the add rule. Add typing rule. Okay, so for example, let's say I want to check what is the type of one plus two. So I want to, so to be able to identify the type, I need to basically either infer or, so I could have basically to, once again, I could either do checking or I could do inference. In the checking world, I would have the annotation that maybe this is already an int, and then I would approve that these rules are actually being obeyed in this annotation. In case of inference, I just have to infer. So let's take the example of inference, because here it's actually possible to infer. And so I'm going to say, okay, so how am I going to infer the type of one plus two? Well, I'm going to say one is an integer literal, so one is of type int. Two is an integer literal, so two is of type int. And one is of type int, and two is of type int, thus it must be true that one plus two is of type int. So what do I do? I basically apply the int rule twice, once for one and the other time for two, and then finally I apply the add rule. So this is what my proof looks like. The first time I apply the int rule, which is one is an integer literal, that means it must be proved that one is an int. Two is an integer literal, so it must be provable that two is an int. And finally, one is an int, it is provable that one is an int, it is provable that two is an int, so it must be provable that one plus two is an int. So this is a very simple example of two type rules and how it can be used to identify the type of an expression.
