Title: Compiler Design Module 69 : Three Address Code
Video ID: 34_yFle5QI8
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

So now that we are familiar with the notion of an interpreted representation or IR, let's look at a particular IR, that is the IR for assembly code generation. Recall that we said that there could be multiple layers of abstraction for IR. For example, we're taking the example of TensorFlow and said one IR could have higher level abstractions like matrices, another IR would be for code generation. So IR for assembly code generation is the lower level IR which is meant for code generation. Typically, this IR is present in the compiler tool chains of almost all languages, because at the end of everything, you need to do code generation for the actual machine and that's the assembly code. So what is this IR? This IR resembles high-level assembly, which means that it has register names just like assembly has registers names, R1, R2, R3. IR has register names. Let's maybe call them temporaries or registers, it's the same thing in IR. And so the important thing is that unlike an assembly architecture, unlike an instruction set architecture, a physical realization of an architecture which has a finite small number of registers, say eight or 16 or 32 or 64, the IR has an unlimited number of registers. Then such IRs typically have control structures like conditional and unconditional branches, and this is also very similar to how it works in assembly, in low-level assembly, typically. Notice that this kind of control structure is kind of more lower-level than higher-level constructs like if-then-else or for or while, right? So all those higher-level constructs will get lowered or generated into these low-level instructions like conditional branch or branch. And it turns out that these low-level instructions like conditional branch or branch, unconditional branch, are enough to be able to do our analysis for optimization purposes, as you're going to see later. And then the instruction, the IR has opcodes, just like assembly, but often they are slightly higher-level opcodes, okay? So for example, at the lower-level opcode could be, in the assembly, could be that there is an addition and it also updates the flags. Whereas at the IR level, maybe you could have a higher-level opcode which does a vector addition or something like that. So I mean, the opcodes look very similar, and the reason they look similar is because at the end of everything, you want to lower these opcodes to actual assembly opcodes. And so because they look similar, it becomes easy to be able, I mean, the loss of performance or efficiency and that translation layer from optimized IR to assembly should not be much. And it would typically not be much as long as the opcodes are similar to the ones in assembly. Now, I say often higher-level, but sometimes they're often lower-level as well. So for example, some opcodes in assembly may be actually doing multiple operations in one go. For example, let's say multiply and add. So many architectures have instructions that would do multiply and add in one instruction. And maybe the IR does not have that kind of thing. Maybe the IR only has separate instructions for multiply and a separate instruction for add. And in which case, when we are translating from the IR to assembly, then we have to be a little bit careful so that we are able to use that single instruction and so on. So opcodes in the IR could be both higher-level or lower-level. What do I mean by higher-level or lower-level? That may be a good idea to discuss a little bit. I would call an opcode higher-level if its translation to the assembly opcode produces more than one instructions, then it's a higher-level opcode. On the other hand, it's a lower-level opcode if more than one instructions result in a single instruction in the assembly, right? So basically, the question is, what is the, during translation, am I increasing the number of instructions or am I decreasing the number of instructions? If I'm increasing, then I'm calling it higher-level opcode. If I'm decreasing, then I'm calling it a lower-level opcode. Okay. 

So here are some IR characteristics. Each instruction, so, you know, there's been a lot of kind of evolution of IR at this level of assembly code generation. And what has been successful is basically something of the following form. Each instruction in such an IR is of the form X equals Y operator Z, where operator op is basically a binary operator. Or X operator Y. So basically two types of instructions. One is basically a binary op and another is a unary op. Okay. And in this form of IR, Y and Z are registers or constants. And they can be either scalars or vectors. And what are vectors? Vectors are just small groups of scalars. Say maybe, you know, a group of four scalars or a group of eight scalars can be called a vector. So what are vector instructions? For example, I could say add a vector of four with another vector of four, which means each element would get added respectively. So it's an element-wise addition operator. Right? So the same operator plus can be applied both to a vector data type or to a scalar data type. And this type of IR is also popularly called the three address code. The reason it's being called the three address code is because in each instruction, there are at most three addresses. X, Y, and Z. Y and Z are the addresses that are read. By addresses, I mean, you know, names for quantities. And so maybe in this case, the only names that matter are register names, the IR register names, which are unlimited in number. The other types of names that may matter are basically memory addresses. And so we're going to see some memory instructions as well. Okay. 

So for example, if you want to have an expression which says X plus Y into Z in your higher level language, let's say in C, then at the IR level, because we have a three address code, such an expression cannot be represented in a single instruction of the three address code. And so we have to break it down into two instructions. T1 equals Y into Z and T2 equals X plus T1. And so basically what has happened here is that I've, you know, this is a three address code. And what are T1 and T2? T1 and T2 are just temporary registers, fresh temporary registers that I can generate because recall that I have an unlimited number of registers, so I can just keep generating registers as and when I need it. There's one very important property of a three address code and which is that each sub expression now has a name. So for example, if I look at any sub expression, Y into Z or X plus Y into Z, so each of them has a name. For example, Y into Z has a name T1 now and X plus T1, X plus Y into Z now has a name T2 and so on. And so every kind of sub computation also has a name in the three address code. And so that is very useful because let's say later on in my program, I'm only interested in Y into Z, then I already have a name for it, which is T1. And so that makes my compiler analysis easier from the perspective of optimization. 

Okay, before we talk about the strategy for IR code generation, let's also look at some more instructions. So for example, there's also load and store instructions in the IR and this work very similar to how we've seen our load and store instructions work in MIPS assembly, which is that you give an address and then you give a destination target. So for example, if I want to load, then I would give the address and the register and the load instruction would read memory at the address and put the contents in the register. And store is just the opposite. It's going to read the register and write to the location in memory, which is specified by the address. 


Okay, so we recall that we discussed this function called cgen that can take a program and generate code for it. And the program was our own toy language program that had declarations and function calls and things like that. And if I was to ask you the question how to generate code from that language to an intermediate representation, not all the way to assembly, but just the intermediate representation. Recall that cgen was generating code for assembly. So we're not interested in generating code for assembly but just the intermediate representation. And once again, I'm going to define a function and this time let's call it igen instead of cgen. And it takes an expression e in our language and a value t, which basically represents the register name in which the value of e should be computed. So recall that when we were talking about cgen, then there we basically said that we assume that we had this invariant that the value of the expression would get computed and stored in a zero at the end of the execution of the generated code. But in igen, we can be a little bit more flexible and we don't have to stick to one particular register, a zero, we have an unlimited number of registers. And so let's just say that igen e,t is going to generate the code such that the value gets computed and stored at the end of the execution in register number t or temporary number t. So it generates code to compute the value of expression e in register t. And this flexibility, this second argument in igen is a big thing because now I don't have to commit to which register I'm going to generate my code in. I'm just basically assuming there are unlimited number of registers and later on maybe I will decide which registers to actually put in machine registers and which ones to keep in memory and things like that. And that's register allocation. This becomes a really nice optimization. 

Okay, so this is what my igen rules would look like. I'm just showing one example rule to show how igen would look different from cgen. So for example, if I have igen e1 plus e2, so this is for the addition operator, comma t. So t is also coming as an input to this function. Then I would first do igen e1 t1, where t1 is different from t. So some new temporary variable that I've created, temporary register that I've created. Then igen e2 t2, and then I just said t equals t1 plus t2, all right? Because igen e1 t1 is going to compute e1 in t1, e2 in t2, and then I can just compute t by just adding t1 plus t2. And notice t1 and t2 are fresh registers that are not being already used in the program. And it's easy to keep track of how many registers have already been used. And so you can just keep minting new registers. 


All right, here is an example of a three address code IR that you may also have seen for your programming assignments. This is the low-level virtual machine, LLVM. The types in LLVM look like the following, i1, i8, i32, i64. So i1 stands for an integer of size one bit. i8 stands for an integer of size eight bits. So in other words, one byte. i32, four bytes, or 32 bits, and so on. So notice that the types are also kind of a little bit lower level, unlike C, which would have, let's say, int, long, and things like that, or even bool, or character type, short. These are kind of slightly higher-level types. And at the LLVM level, we don't want to keep track of how big is a short or how big is an int. Actually, the C language doesn't really specify how big int is. It just says it should be at least this much big. So for example, some implementations of C would have an eight-byte integer, and some implementations would have a four-byte integer. But at the level of LLVM, that decision should have already been made. So what is an intermediate representation? Recall that some decisions have already been made, and some decisions remain to be made. And we want to design an IR such that only those decisions have been made which are not as consequential to optimization as possible, and those decisions which are very consequential to optimizations, those should have been made. So for example, what should be the size of an integer? Maybe that's not so consequential to optimization, or maybe that's something that we want to be fixed about, or maybe that's just coming from the configuration of the environment. And so those decisions have been made by the time you reach LLVM. But what are the decisions that have not been made? Well, the decisions that have not been made are what are the registers in which the values will be computed, right? The machine registers. Or what are the instruction opcodes that are going to be used to compute these things? So unlike the Cgen function which was doing this immediately, these decisions immediately, and going all the way to assembly, here we're keeping some things as abstract as possible, and later on we decide what we want to do. Okay. Also, there are some more types, like float. You know, maybe float also can have a size. So instead of having float double, maybe you can say the float of this type, float 32, float 64, and so on. Also, it has pointer types. So you can point to a type of... You can have a pointer to a type I32, or you can have a pointer to a pointer to type I32, or you can have a pointer to a float, or things like that. So it also has pointer types. This is very similar to how it works in C as well. So C and LLVM are quite similar, actually. But then they have other types. For example, this is the vector type, four cross I32. Now, this vector type is actually not present in C. And so this is basically something which is kind of, you know, you can think of LLVM being slightly higher level than C in that matter, because this basically says it's a vector of four 32-bit values, or integer values, right? And this is useful, for example, to do vectorization. So I can have an opcode which adds to vector quantities. And now, later, when I do code generation, if my architecture actually has a vector instruction, then I can get to use it. So these kind of instructions may not be present in the high-level language. In fact, they are not present in most high-level languages, like C and C++, or even Java. But they are present in this low-level IR, because the idea is that the optimizer is going to convert the high-level program such that it's going to find these vectorization opportunities, and it's going to introduce these such vector types. Just like these vector types, there are some struct types, all right? So struct types do not, unlike vector types, which basically are a number, which is the number of repetitions, and a single type, so vectors are basically repetitions of the same type, a struct could be a collection of different types. So just like in a C struct. So example, I could have a struct which has one I32 value and another I16 value, and maybe a third float value, and things like that. And such types are also supported in the LLVM IR. The reason I'm discussing LLVM IR is because it's one of the most popular three-address code style IRs, and it's almost the de facto popular IR that is used for code generation, optimized code generation for most architectures, including x86 and ARM. Also, it has RISC-like opcodes. For example, it has, so it wants to keep its opcodes as simple as possible. So it has add, load, store, call, function call, read, and these opcodes could sometimes have an unbounded number of arguments. For example, call could basically say, what are the arguments, and the argument list could be unbounded, and this is different from how call works in a real machine. When in a real machine, the call may basically assume that the arguments are laid out on stack or something like that. Here, the arguments can be on the registers, and they can be an unbounded number of registers. Similarly, return can actually return a set of registers or a vector value or things like that, conditional branch, and so on.
