Title: Compiler Design Module 144 : Space Partitioning Constraints Example
Video ID: K1kNF_FRZ5U
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

So we discussed an example where we created space partition constraints. And then we basically saw what it would look like in a 2D diagram. We took an example which had a loopness of depths two. And then we just gave the solution and said, look, here's a solution and you can verify for yourself that this solution satisfies the constraints. We're going to look at it in a more mathematical sense today instead of looking at it just from a pictorial representation and convincing ourselves that the solution works. Let's look at it from a mathematical standpoint to convince ourselves that the solution actually works even from a mathematical standpoint. So it's the same loop that we had earlier for i equals one to 100, for j equals one to 100, xij equals xij plus yi minus one j and yij equals yij plus xij minus one. And we said that the only data dependencies of consequence here are xij with xij minus one and yi minus one j with yij, right? So these two and these two, the diagonal ones. Because the other ones are not going to make much difference except for the fact that this entire statement has to have, you know, this entire C statement which involves three memory accesses should all be mapped to the same processor and similarly for the second statement as well. So if you take that, then the only two kind of conflicting potentially, accesses that could potentially have data dependencies are xij and xij minus one and yi minus one j and yij, okay? So when I look at xij and xij minus one, so just picking one of these data dependency pair of statements that have a data dependency which is xij and xij minus one, what do I need to do? What are the unknowns? The unknowns are C1, which is C1 is the mapping function from S1 for S1 and so the coefficient matrix for S1 and small c1 is the additive vector for S1. Similarly, capital C2 is the coefficient matrix for S2 and small c2 is the additive vector for S2. So in other words, if my loop iteration indexes, indices for S1 were i1 j1, then the processor ID for the i1 j1 iteration count would be given by C1 i1, C1 into i1 j1 plus small c1 and similarly for S2, we will do capital C1 small c2. Okay, so what is the maximum rank that C1, capital C1 can have? Well, notice that the loop iteration nest itself is of depth two. So the maximum loop nest, the dimension of the iteration space is two and so the maximum dimension of the processor space on which this can get mapped is also two and so from that, we basically get a square coefficient matrix. The number of columns represents the depth of the loop iteration nest and the number of rows represents the size or the dimension of the processor matrix, the maximum dimension and this is true for both capital C1 and capital C2 and also small c1 and small c2 because the additive constants will have two rows each. Now, when I look at this, one thing that I would going to, now basically I want to solve for capital C1 and so when I solve capital C1 basically means I need to figure out what are the values for each of the elements in this matrix, there are four elements in the matrix and so I have named them so that I can easily kind of refer to them that C triple one, C double one two, C one two one, C one two two, similarly C two one one, C two one two, C two two one and C two two two. So there are eight such unknowns in the coefficient matrix and similarly small c1 one and small c1 two, small c2 one and small c2 two are the unknowns in the additive vectors and I want to solve for these unknowns. Now, one thing that I'm going to tell you upfront about this problem from what we know from the previous module is that I know that the best solution for this is going to be a one dimensional processor space mapping which means the processors, the dimension of the processor space on which this is going to get mapped, this loop is going to map is going to have one dimension of one. So that's the value of K that we have been using in our previous discussion where K is the dimension of the processor space. How do I know that? Well, that's from, you know, that's just, I'm using the previous knowledge that we have from the figure where basically there are N number of two, two N number of independent chains and two N is basically a linear number in the, in one dimension, which is order N. So in other two, N is 100 in this case. So that's basically the number of independent parallel processing threads that you can create maximum is basically linear in the size of one dimension. On the other hand, if there were no data dependencies then the processor space would have been two dimensional. And so what does this mean? What do I know just from this previous knowledge? In general, when we are solving for this we won't have this previous knowledge but just to make the discussion simpler and easy to kind of communicate I'm using the previous knowledge. And so what does it mean based on the fact that we already know that the processor space that we're going to map the iteration space to is going to be one dimensional. It basically means that this matrix capital C one is going to have a rank of one. Okay. In other words, there's going to be only one linearly independent row in this matrix. The second row will be dependent. In other words, I can specify, I can, you know, C one to one and C one to two can be always specified as linear multiples of C triple one and C one one two. In other words, when I, I mean I can always kind of bring this matrix to an echelon form. And so basically what I can say is that, I mean because it is rank one, I can always bring it to a form where the last row the second row is always zero. Okay. So this is zero and this is zero. And if the row, because it's going to be a rank I already kind of from my previous discussion, no that's going to be zero. Now when I'm going to actually solve the equation in, you know, on a computer or something like that I won't have this information in which case I am going to have, you know all the four unknowns here and then I'm going to solve for them. And then from that solution itself it will become apparent that these these matrices are rank one but I don't want to go through the entire, you know solution in my discussion today. So I'm just making it simpler by just noticing that I'm sure that I'm, you know the last row is going to come out to be a linearly dependent row on the first row because I know that the solution is going to be a rank one matrix. And so I'm just going to simplify the discussion but just, you know, assuming that this I can just strike out the second row. In other words, I can just make this row zero. And similarly, I can strike out the row from the additive vector as well, which is the small C's. Okay. And so with this discussion this is our new problem. Capital C one is, has two unknowns. And now I, you know I can use a smaller number of unknowns. Also the naming becomes easier. So it's a C one one and C one two instead of C triple one and C double one two and stuff like that. And now C two is C two one and C two two. Once again, I know I've made this simplification just for discussion purposes. In an actual implementation you would basically optimistically assume that the matrix may be full rank. And then when you get to the solution you're going to find over the rank of the matrix actually one. And then it is at that point that you're going to remove the last row. So I'm just removing the last row upfront so that, you know, the discussion becomes easier. All right. So now I have to solve for all these unknowns. So how many unknowns are there? There are one, two, three, four, five, six. All right. So there are six unknowns here and that I need to solve for. And what are, you know, what are the constraints? It's the same space partitioning constraints that we are, that we have already seen. So what are the space partitioning constraints? The space partitioning constraints are that these capital, these, you know, when I multiply, when I use C one, I, when I multiply this with the iteration vector plus C one should equal C, you know, should be equal for different values of I one J one and I one prime J one prime. They should be mapping to the same location in the processor space or the same PID in the processor space. If there was a data dependency between I one J one and I one prime J one prime. And similarly for I two, first statement S two, which case it will be I two J two and I two prime J two prime. And similarly across S one and S two. All right. So for example, because both the iteration space of both S one and S two are equal, you know, across these things also going to be I one J one and I two prime J two prime. Okay. So, so here are my space partitioning constraints as we know them. If I is less than equal to 100. So I'm not using I one and J one now because, as I said, both S one and S two have the same iteration space. So let's just use I and J because it's going to be the same iteration space. So if I is less than equal to 100 and J is less than equal to 100 for S one, and then if I prime is less than equal to 100 and greater than equal to one, and J prime is less than equal to 100 and greater than equal to one. And there is a data dependency between xij and xij-1. So what does that mean? It basically means that xij is pointing to the same location as x i prime, j prime-1. In other words, when will these two locations point to the same thing? When i is equal to i prime and j equals j prime-1. So that's our constraint. That's coming from our f i plus small f equals f prime i prime plus small f prime. So capital F and small f are coming from i, j. Capital F prime and small f prime are coming from i, j-1. So basically what I get is i equals i prime and j equals j prime-1. So my constraint is that if all these conditions are true, for all such values of i and i prime and j and j prime, whenever this condition is true, it must be true that c11, c12 multiplied with i, j plus small c1 equals c21, c22 multiplied by i prime, j prime plus small c2. So whenever this is true, this is true for all possible values of i, j, i prime, j prime. Okay, so I need to solve this equation and I'm going to propose some. So once again, I'm not going to discuss the algorithm to solve the solution, but I'm going to propose some potential solutions and basically to get a sense of what is the nature of this problem. So here is one possible solution. So I want to find a solution to c11 and c12 and similarly small c1 and capital C21 and c22 and small c2 such that these constraints are satisfied. Now notice that whenever i equals i prime and j equals j prime-1, these should be equal. So here is one simple idea that what if I just say that c12 equals 0 and c11 equals 1. Alright, and similarly c21 equals 1 and c22 equals 0. In other words, the coefficient of i is 1 and the coefficient of j is 0. In which case, basically because whenever i is equal to i prime, this is going to be the processor that is going to map to is i and let's say small c1 and small c2 are also 0. So then this processor, the processor indicated by the PID indicated by the LHS of this equation is going to be just i. Alright, so here is my proposed solution. Small c1 equals c2 equals 0, capital C11 equals capital C21 equals 1. Similarly capital C12 equals capital C22 equals 0. I claim that with this solution, all these constraints are getting satisfied. So why? Let's see, if capital C11 equals 1 and capital C12 equals 0, that's what these constraints say, then this becomes just i and small c1 equals 0. So this whole thing becomes i. Similarly, this whole thing becomes i prime, because capital C21 is 1, capital C22 is 0, small c2 is 0. So whenever i is equal to i prime, this becomes i and this becomes i prime and I know i equals i prime, so the processor ID was also i and i prime which are equal and so these constraints are getting satisfied. Now I'm not claiming that this is the maximum rank solution. Actually it turns out that the maximum rank solution, if the only constraint was this constraint, then the maximum rank solution would have been a rank 2 solution and I'm just working with the rank 1 solution. But this is one of the possible solutions which may not be the maximum rank solution. It is not as dumb as a trivial solution. Of course a trivial solution is both C11 and C12 are 0 and similarly C21 and C22 are 0. So everything is 0, which is a trivial rank 0 solution and I'm not interested in that. But you know I have a better solution which is C11 is 1 and C12 is 0 and C21 is 1 and C22 is 0 and these additive coefficients are also 0, in which case these constraints are going to get satisfied. Okay, but this is not the only constraint I have in the program. So let's remember the solution. The solution is that the coefficients of i are 1 and coefficients of j are 0. j and j prime are 0 and i and i prime are 1. Now let's look at the other constraint which is coming from yij and y i minus 1j. So this is the other constraint that's coming from y i minus 1j and y ij and once again I set up my equations. The only difference is that now the capital F and small f and capital F prime and small f prime are different. Capital F and small f are relating to yij and capital F prime and small f prime are relating to y i minus 1j and so now my space partitioning constraints are whenever i minus 1 which is you know coming from S1 equals i prime which is coming from S2 and j which is coming from S1 and j prime which is coming from S2 then see then the same thing right c11 c into ij plus small c equals c2 into i prime j prime plus small c. Now just like I had you know I had done in my previous slide I can make the same observation that here it's j equals j prime. So what I can do is one solution to this this whole thing could be that let's just put a coefficient of j to be 1 and coefficient of i to be 0 and that would be a solution to this set of equation this this particular equation but now this is not going to be a valid solution for the previous constraints that I had on the previous slide. So I want a solution that's that has a solution that satisfies both the constraints and that's that makes the problem interesting isn't it. So the first thing I want to point out is that the solution that I had in the previous slide is not going to satisfy the constraints on this slide. So this recall that the previous slide the solution was coefficients of i which are c11 and c21 are 1 and coefficients of j are c12 which are c12 and c22 are 0 and if I do that then I get and then the additive constants are 0 then if I do that then I get i plus 0 which is i and here I get i prime and it's not so it but i is not equal to i prime i prime equals i minus 1 in the in the preconditions so so this is not going to work right so this solution is not going to satisfy this constraint because whenever i minus 1 equals i prime it is not true that i equals i prime and so this solution does not satisfy the constraint on this slide so this is the recall that this is the solution that we had for the previous set of constraints on the previous slide. Now here is another possible solution and the solution is that I put the coefficients of j and j prime to be 1 and coefficients of i and i prime to be 0 so just flip and now it satisfies the solution the constraints on this slide because now whenever j equals j prime the processor IDs that the two statements map to are going to be same but then this does not satisfy the constraints on the previous slide for the same reason and I claim that here is the solution which satisfies both the constraints and the solution is that you have both all the coefficients of i to be 1 so c11 c21 is 1 coefficients of j to be minus 1 so c12 and c22 are minus 1 and the additive constants are also important c2 c1 is minus 1 and c2 equals 0 so let's see whenever i minus 1 equals i prime and j equals j prime then c11 becomes 1 so this becomes 1 c12 becomes minus 1 similarly c21 becomes 1 and c22 becomes minus 1 c1 becomes minus 1 and this becomes 0 and so this becomes i minus j minus 1 equals i prime minus j prime plus 0 so I'm just not writing the 0 and is it true that whenever i minus 1 equals i prime and j equals j prime i minus j minus 1 equals i prime minus j prime well because j equals j prime I can just you know eliminate j and j prime and both sides and then I'm remaining with i minus 1 equals i prime and that's all that's true because of this constraint so indeed this solution that I have which is c1 equals minus capital C 1 1 capital C 2 1 equals 1 capital C 1 2 capital C 2 2 equal minus 1 and small c1 equal minus 1 small c2 equals 0 satisfies the constraints on this slide and I claim that you can try this solution also on the constraints that I had in the previous slide and you would find that this set of constraints this solution satisfies those constraints as well so now we have a solution that satisfies both sets of constraints unlike the previous two solutions which satisfied only one of the constraints
