Title: Compiler Design Module 135 : Self Spatial ReUse
Video ID: T9aY9FOJ9hc
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

In the previous module we discussed about self-reuse or more precisely self-temporal reuse. In this module we are going to talk about self-spatial reuse and to motivate the discussion let's look at this particular example. For i equals 0 to n, ai equals 0. Now does this have self-temporal reuse? Well the answer is, can we determine by figuring out what is the coefficient matrix? The coefficient matrix in this case is just 1. The rank of this coefficient matrix is 1 and the dimensionality of the coefficient matrix is also 1 and so the dimensionality of the loop iteration space is also 1. And so there is no reuse because the dimensionality of the loop iteration space is also the same as the dimensionality of the axis, both are 1. So there is no self-reuse. But if I ask the question, is there self-spatial reuse? The answer is yes because if I bring a0 into the cache then a1, a2, a3 up to whatever is the cache line size are also in the cache and so if I access a1 then it's going to hit the same cache line. So multiple accesses are hitting the same cache line even though they are not hitting the same memory location. And so we want to somehow characterize self-spatial reuse. So in this particular example, this example does not have self-reuse, self-temporal reuse but it does have self-spatial reuse and we want to identify whether a given piece of code has self-spatial reuse or not. How are we going to go about doing this? Here is another example to motivate the discussion further. So for i equals 0 to n, for j equals 0 to m, aj i equals 0. Does this have self-reuse, self-temporal reuse? The answer is again no because if I look at the coefficient matrix, it just comes out to be 0, it comes out to be 0, 1, 1, 0 for i, j because it's j, i and the rank of this matrix is 2 and the dimension of the loop iteration space is also 2. The rank is the same as the dimension of the loop iteration space. So there is no self-reuse. But if I ask the question is there self-spatial reuse? The answer depends on whether two cache lines can be, the same cache line can be accessed multiple times across different points in the iteration space. And so the answer is actually yes because if I look at iteration points, let's say 0, 1 and 0, 1 and 1, 1, okay? So 0, 1 and 1, 1 are going to access elements 1, 0 and 1, 1 in the array space because say i is 0 and so I'm using i, j notation. So in the first case i is 0, j is 1, in the second case i is 1 and j is also 1. So in the first case, the access is going to be to location j, i which is 1, 0. So this is access and in the second case, the access is going to be to j, i which is 1, 1. Now 1, 0 and 1, 1 are adjacent elements in my matrix assuming row major form and so 1, 0 and 1, 1 are adjacent. In other words, they are hitting the same cache line. Now and so there is the same cache line is being accessed across different iterations of this loop nest and so yes, there is self-spatial reuse. So the answer here is yes. Notice that self-spatial reuse or self-reuse is different from spatial locality or temporal locality, alright? So for example, the distance between accesses to the same cache line may be very large. For example, the distance between 0, 1 and 1, 1 is order n. So the iteration order, recall that the order of execution of the iteration space is basically the ascending lexicographic order. So I am going to first execute 0, 1 then I am going to execute 0, 2, 0, 3, 0, 4, 0, 5 all the way till 0, n minus 1 and then I am going to come to 1, 0, 1, 1, 1, 2, 1, 3. So the distance between accesses to the same cache line is pretty large, right? So the reuse distance is very high but that does not mean that there is no reuse. There is reuse just that the reuse distance is high. In other words, there is self-spatial reuse, there is no spatial locality, alright? So locality is a stronger requirement than reuse. Locality requires that there is reuse and the reuse distance is small. And we say there is spatial locality. Right now we are not really talking about locality, we are talking about only reuse, is there reuse? And so the answer in this particular example is yes, there is reuse because the same cache line is going to be accessed for different iteration, different points in the iteration space even if, even though the different points may be very far apart in execution order, okay? Now, to be able to reason about self-spatial reuse, we basically want to have some notion of capturing what is the size of a cache line. And so we are going to use an approximation, alright? Because we don't want to make our analysis too complex, we want to have some kind of first order approximation to be able to figure out whether there is reuse or not. And so we basically consider two arrays to share a cache line, if and only if they differ, only in the last dimension of a d-dimensional array. In other words, we assume that the entire last dimension fits in a single cache line. So all the n elements in the last dimension fit in a single cache line. And if we assume that, under that simplifying assumption, we are going to identify, try and identify whether there is self-spatial reuse in this program or not. So for example, here is for i equals 0 to i is less than n, i++. So I just assume what is the last dimension here because there is only one dimension, the last dimension is that single dimension, which is i. And so I can just assume that this entire dimension belongs to a single cache line. And so yes, there is self-reuse here because now I just basically assume that i has been just removed and so from one dimension it has become a zero-dimensional access. And now I can basically, because it's the same cache line that's getting accessed all over and over again across all the iterations. And now we can say yes, there is self-spatial reuse. Let's take the other example that we saw in one of the previous slides. For i equals 0 to n, for j equals 0 to m, aji equals 0. Now once again, I basically to identify whether there is self-spatial reuse or not, I'm going to strike off the last dimension of the access, it's kind of behaving as though the entire last dimension fits in a single cache line. And now I'm going to say, okay, so what is the remaining index? It's just j. What is the dimensionality of the access for the remaining indices? It's just 1. What is dimensionality of the loop nest? It's 2. So the dimensionality of the remaining truncated access matrix is 1, the dimensionality of the loop nest is 2, 1 is less than 2 and so there is self-spatial reuse. Notice that there is no self-reuse, no self-temporal reuse, but there is self-spatial reuse under the simplifying assumption that the entire last dimension of the array access fits in a single cache line. Now you may question this particular assumption that the entire last dimension fits in a cache line because previously I've said that the dimension size is very large, the n is typically very large and cache sizes are, cache line sizes are not that large, they are typically let's say 64 bytes or something like that. Now the, but even though the cache line sizes are much smaller than the typical dimension size, for the last dimension, accesses are anyway cheaper. For example, once every C accesses. So on the last dimension, if there is reuse, then with 1 over C probability, I'm going to have a cache miss because, you know, assuming it's completely randomly, I'm accessing the last dimension completely randomly, then in the last dimension with 1, with C minus 1 by C probability, I'm going to find it in the cache line in the cache and with 1 by C probability, it's going to be a cache miss. And so once every C accesses, we have a cache miss and so this is significantly cheaper than for all the other dimensions where, you know, if I'm accessing stuff, then they're almost, they're all very far apart and because they're far apart and if they're at that particular dimension is different, then with almost 1 probability, I'll have a cache miss. So I shouldn't say use the word cache miss, but because I'm not really talking about locality, but reuse, what I want to say is that two accesses would lie on the same cache line with a probability of C minus, with a high probability, with a higher probability in the last dimension than for the other dimensions where it's going to be all 0, right? And so this, for the last dimension, accesses are anyway cheaper because you're going to have to have a miss once for every C accesses on average and so this approximation is meaningful. Well, I mean, this is not a very convincing argument for why we can just assume that the last dimension is, you know, the entire cache line basically fits the last dimension entirely. It seems like a very crude approximation, but for the purposes of our analysis, we are going to work with this approximation. It does give us practical benefits in many scenarios. So here's the trick. We just drop the last dimension or the last row of the coefficient matrix F and now the resulting coefficient matrix capital F now becomes an effective coefficient matrix because the last dimension is just meaningless because the last dimension basically, you know, if you access any element in the last dimension, it's almost like the entire row has been loaded and so we just drop it altogether and if the rank of the resulting truncated matrix, capital F, is less than the depth of the loop nest, then there is self-spatial reuse. So the difference between self-spatial reuse and self-reuse is that for self-spatial reuse, we just truncate the capital F matrix by removing the last row, the last dimension of the array access and do exactly the same analysis to see what is the rank of the resulting truncated matrix. If that rank is less than the dimensionality of the loop nest, then we say there is reuse, in this case, self-spatial reuse, otherwise, we say there is no reuse. So, what is the significance of identifying whether there is self-spatial reuse or not? Basically, the significance is that there is a possibility to reorder the computation such that we basically exploit spatial locality. So, recall that I already said that reuse is different from locality. Locality is a stronger condition. Locality requires that there is reuse and the reuse distance is small. The first question you want to ask to identify whether there is a possibility of exploiting spatial locality is that, is there self-reuse? If there is no self-reuse, there can be no spatial locality, right? If there is no self-spatial reuse, there cannot be any self-spatial locality. So, but if there is self-spatial reuse, then second question you have to ask is, is it possible to reorder the computation such that the reuse distance between multiple accesses to the same cache line become closed in time, right? Closed in execution order. So, once we have determined that there is self-spatial reuse, we have determined that it may be possible, we are not guaranteed, it may be possible to reorder computation so that the innermost loop varies only in the last coordinate of the array, in which case, we, if we are able to do that, then we are able to exploit spatial locality. Here is an example. So, let's say I have a three-dimensional array access. So, let's assume that I have a two-dimensional loop nest with loop iteration indices i and j. And now, inside the loop body, I have a three-dimensional array access 3, a 3 comma 2 i comma 7 i plus j for iteration indices i j. Now, if I remove the last index, which is 7 i plus j, I basically get, if I remove the last dimension, then I get removing, then I get a 3 comma 2 i, which has rank 1 because there is only one free variable i in this, in this particular coefficient matrix. If I draw the coefficient matrix, it basically 0 0, 1 0, 2 0, right, for i comma j. And this one has, this basically means that the rank is 1 because 0 comma 0 is just a 0 row and then 2 0 is the only linearly independent row. Now, which has rank 1 and because the rank is less than 2, which is the dimensionality of the loop iteration space, this access has self-spatial reuse. And it's also easy to see if the inner, you know, for different values of j, I'm basically accessing the same cache line, which is because assuming that the entire cache line, the last dimension fitting the same cache line, I'm basically accessing 3 comma 2 i and that cache line for different values of j, different values of j don't matter because all values of j are going to only change the last dimension and the last dimension resuming has, it belongs to the same cache line. Now, so moreover, if j is the innermost loop, right, so the outer loop is iterating on i and the inner loop is iterating on j, then this access will also exhibit spatial locality. So there's not only spatial reuse in that case, but also spatial locality because the innermost loop iterates only on the inner dimension, right. So if the innermost loop iterates only on the inner dimension and the inner dimension is assumed to be entirely fitting in the cache line, then that basically means that the inner loop has a lot of locality because it's accessing the same cache line over and over again and so that's why we say that the program has spatial locality, which is a stronger condition than spatial reuse. However, if it was the other way around, if i was the inner loop index and j was the outer loop index, then this program would have had, still had spatial reuse, but it wouldn't have had spatial locality because for different, the innermost loop would not iterate on the innermost dimension, the innermost loop would iterate on the second dimension in this array access also. As a general rule, for there to be spatial locality, the iteration vector 0 0 0 0 0 1, where 1, this is supposed to be the iteration vector and the last dimension of the iteration vector should be in the null space of the truncated F to obtain spatial locality. Okay, so what do I mean? Notice that first of all that the null space of capital F, the truncated F should be non-trivial for there to be spatial reuse. So first of all, you know there needs to be a null space which is non-trivial. By non-trivial, I mean apart from the zero comma zero point, there should be more points in the null space. Moreover, the vector 0 0 0 0 0 1 should be in the null space for spatial locality. So the first condition was for spatial reuse which was basically null space should be non-trivial, should be non-trivial and the second condition for spatial locality, the additional condition is that the iteration vector 0 0 0 0 1 should belong to the null space. What is the intuition behind this condition? Well, basically it's encoding the fact that the innermost loop is iterating on the last dimension. Okay, so the iteration of the innermost loop has no consequence on all the other dimensions. That's what it means, right? Because all the other dimensions, you know, they're going to remain constant irrespective of what I do in the last iteration. You know, that's one kind of informal way of specifying it but this is a more formal way of specifying it that the iteration vector 0 0 0 0 1 should belong to the null space of the truncated matrix F to obtain spatial locality. So for example, in the example that we have seen, if i is the innermost index, then 0 1 does not satisfy this requirement. Okay, so 0 1 does not satisfy this requirement. What is the null space of the iteration of the truncated matrix capital F? So firstly, what is the truncated matrix capital F? It is nothing but for the first element it's just 0 0 for the first dimension because it's just 3 and for the second dimension here, so the first dimension is just 0 0 the coefficient matrix and for the second dimension the coefficient matrix is 2 0. Okay, that's if I basically use i comma j. On the other hand, if I use j comma i where so i was the inner loop index, then the coefficient matrix would be 0 0 and 0 2. Now notice that in one case, in this case, 0 1 is in the null space because if I multiply this by 0 1, I get a null vector. Whereas in this case, 0 1 is not in the null space whereas this is null. So in other words, if i is the inner loop index, so this is i is inner and here j is inner. So if j is inner, then this loop exhibits spatial locality. If i is inner, then this loop does not exhibit spatial locality. In either case, the loops exhibit spatial reuse. Here are some more examples a 3 comma 2 i comma i plus 7 j. Does this have spatial reuse? The answer is going to be found by first removing the last dimension completely. What do I get? Once again, I'm assuming a two-dimensional loop nest on i comma j. So notice that for reuse, I don't really care about the order of i comma j. Doesn't really matter which one is inner and which one is outer. It's only for locality that it matters. So for locality, the order of iteration space matters. For reuse, the order of iteration space does not matter. So in this case, I'm only talking about reuse. So I'm not really specified about the order of i and j with respect to each other. So now, the remaining truncated matrix is 3 comma 2 i. What is the rank of this remaining truncated matrix? It's 1 and so the answer is yes. It has spatial reuse. Now, let's look at this. In this case, I removed the last dimension again. The remaining truncated matrix is 2 i comma i plus 7 j. What is the rank of the coefficient matrix in this case? Well, it is 2 because both these two dimensions are linearly independent. The dimensionality of the axis is 2. The dimensionality of the loop iteration space is also 2 i comma j and so the answer here is no. It does not have spatial reuse. Let's look at a third example. Here again, I removed the last dimension. I look at the other two dimensions. What is the rank of this truncated matrix? It's 1 because if I fix one of the dimensions, the other dimension is followed. It's just going to be equal. And so the rank of the dimension of the axis is 1, which is less than 2 and so it has self-spatial reuse. So, here's the summary. The first array axis has self-spatial reuse. The second array axis does not have self-spatial reuse. The third array axis also has self-spatial reuse and it would have had self-spatial locality if i was the innermost loop index because if the i was the innermost loop index, then 0 comma 1 would be part of the null space of this particular coefficient matrix and then there would be spatial locality. On the other hand, if i was not the inner loop index, if i was the outer loop index, then 0 1 would not be a part of the null space. In fact, 1 0 would be a part of the null space, but that's a different matter. 0 1 would not be a part of the null space and so this particular loop program while would have spatial reuse would not have spatial locality.
