Title: Compiler Design Module 124 17: Context sensitive pointer analysis with fields
Video ID: vdxmmMo5H1s
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

So I'm going to continue our discussion on call context sensitive point analysis, but this time I'm going to tackle fields or member values or in classes. So once again, I'm going to have this example where, you know, there's a base class which has a virtual function, virtual abstract function F, there are two derived classes D1 and D2 which implement different implementations of the virtual function F. And now, just like I had a copy class in my previous example, I'm going to have a memory class in this example, which has a field and this is the major difference, which has a field of type base, which is the memory of this class. And there it has two functions set and get. So setM basically sets this memory element. So setM takes SM and does M equals SM and getM just returns the current value of M. So that's why it's called a memory class. Okay. So now we want to basically look at an example and see how a call context sensitive analysis will tackle fields in classes and so let's get on with it. So let's say this is the main function and just like before, we have objects that basically represent the memory class, just like we had an object that used to represent the copy class in our previous example. So let's say memory1, m1 is allocated here, new memory at location lm1. Similarly, m2 is allocated location lm2. You say m1.setM new d1 at location ld1. So ld1 acts both as the allocation site for this new d1 object and it acts as a call site for this call to setM. Similarly, m2.setM with new d2, ld2 acts as the allocation site and the call site. And finally, we do base r1 equals m1.getM. So recall that we had done m1.setM new d1. So m1.getM will return whatever was set last based on the memory element M. And so in this case, we can see that r1 will get this d1 object. And similarly, r2 will also get the d2 object because we are doing the same r2 equals m2.getM. And then when we do r1.f, then we know that it's always going to be d1's f that's going to get called and here r2.f is d2's f implementation that's going to get called. So we can see this manually, but the question is can the compiler see it and can a call context sensitive analysis identify this information automatically? So let's see how a compiler is going to proceed with it. The interesting thing here is that this object is now going to live in a field of the memory class and we have to associate the points to information across this journey of this pointer. So the first thing I'm going to do is I'm going to label all the call sites and allocation sites. So for example, we already had lm1, lm2, ld1, ld2. And additionally, I'll also label these call sites getM and getM with lr1 and lr2. The second thing I need to do is I want to need to make the this keyword explicit. In C++ or Java, we usually use this which refers to the current object. And so for example, when you say m equals sm, it actually resolves to this dot m equals sm, right? Similarly, when you say getM, it resolves to return this dot m. So you make the this element explicit. And not just that, just to distinguish between the this in setM's context or setM's scope and this in getM's scope, we superscript this with setM's this or this superscript setM dot m equals sm and this superscript getM dot m is returned. So I mean, just to distinguish the two, when we draw the points to graph across these variables, we don't want to merge both of them and kind of treat them similarly. So that's why I label them using a superscript based on the function name in which the scope of the function name in which they appear. Now, the one important kind of difference between the previous example and this example is because we have state in the object, and that's why we need the this keyword, we need to figure out how the function called dispatch works and how correspondingly the transfer function across the dispatch works. So let's say I allocate a new object of type X and then I call a function foo with argument A on that. And let's say foo is declared in this class X. This is separate from the example that I was discussing earlier. I'm just using some pattern and then foo is declared here with let's say the formal argument B and inside it, you have somebody which says which refers to the this keyword just like we had in the previous exam. Now, notice that this function call dispatch basically involves copying the actual arguments to the formal argument. So that's B equals A, but also the receiving object, the this object is also just treated like just another argument of this function call. In fact, one way to think about such dispatches is that this object is the first argument of this member function call. So because it's treated just like an extra argument, the formal argument name is this keyword or more explicitly this foo. So this foo is the formal arguments name and the actual arguments name, which is at the call site is X. And so at the time of dispatch, the effective operation that's happening is that we are assigning whatever is in X to this variable to this formal argument this foo, just like you were assigning A to B for other arguments. So the receiving object is the first argument of the member function call in these object oriented languages. And this foo is the is its formal argument name. And that's why this dispatch basically behaves like this. So this has implications on how we are going to do transfer for points to analysis. We're just going to apply the copy rule for this foo and for B while we are doing the points to analysis. For example, if I'm using the Anderson's analysis, then recall that we had this inference rule for function call dispatch which said if small o has type capital O, where capital O is a class and small o is an object of that class. If I'm analyzing this statement, this function called dispatch statement o.foo with argument X, t colon equals o.foo with argument X at location L being analyzed in context C. So that means that this function called dispatch statement actually is being analyzed in context C. And this function definition exists as a part of the program. This function definition says that f is a member function of capital O which is the class. And it takes some formal arguments which let's say we say a and it has some body which we say e. Okay, so when we do this dispatch, then we basically copy the value of x to a. And when we are doing the points to analysis, then a will be analyzed in the context of this function body and which is which in our call context sensitive analysis with depth one is going to be L. So a L will be the corresponding version of a which is going to get updated because of the points to set of x in context C. In other words, we are going to update the outgoing edges of a L using the outgoing edges of x C. Set differently, the outgoing edges of written in a constraint form the outgoing edges of a L should be a subset of the outgoing edges of x C. Identically just like any other argument that this argument as we said is just another formal argument. And the O argument which is the receiving object here is the actual argument for corresponding to this. And so just like we did we updated a L using x C, we are going to update this F L using O L. In other words, the outgoing edges of this F L will be updated to include all the outgoing edges of O, I should have said O C. Okay, this is an error. This is this should be O C. Okay, so it should be because O is being analyzed in context C. Finally, because of this function called dispatch, we are going to analyze e in context L. And that's what this this expression means here with the turnstile. We had discussed this in our previous module. Okay, similarly, let's just for completeness discuss what the rule for return is going to be. So if a return statement is being analyzed in call context L, which means it must be a part of the e body inside F A equals e, then you know whatever B can point to will now get transferred to whatever T can point to. T is being analyzed in context C, B was being analyzed in context L. So we update T C based on B L. Or in other words, we update the outgoing edges of T C using the outgoing edges of B L. In a constraint form, that means that the outgoing edges of T C must be a superset in the final solution of the outgoing edges of B L. So this is the return rule. Okay, equipped with these rules, let's just look at our example once again and see how we are going to execute our points to analysis on this example, which has a memory element stored represented as a field M inside a class. So the first two statements are just allocating new memory objects at locations LM1 and LM2 using the allocation site abstraction that basically means M1 can point to LM1 and M2 can point to LM2. Let's assume that the main function is being analyzed in context 0. So then M1, the version of M1 that we are tracking is M10 and the allocation site that we are tracking is also LM10. So this is our points to graph because of the first statement and this is the points to graph for the due to the second statement. So M20 points to LM2 because of the first two statements here. Okay, now we are going to look at this dispatch M1.setM new D1 at location LD1. Now because we allocate a new location new D1 and then we call setM which is going to you know assign to SM at the formal argument SM is going to get this value new D1. New D1 is going to be the three address code variable that holds the pointer of new D1 is going to point to LD1 and that's going to be used to update SM. So SM in context LD1 will now start pointing to whatever is allocated here, the allocation site here, which was LD1 in context 0. So SM in context LD1 because of setM is now pointing to an abstract object represented by the allocation site LD1 in context of main which is 0. This is because of the dispatch because of the copy of the actual argument which holds to the formal argument SM in context LD1. Okay similarly SM LD2 points to L0 D2. That's because of the second two statements. Now we're going to execute the body of setM and we're going to see how that behaves. So the only statement in the body is this dot M equals SM and more precisely I should have said this setM dot M equals SM all right and similarly this should have been this getM so more qualification. Okay so this setM is dot M is equal to SM. Now recall that this is just our assignment rule this is similar to saying that star this equals SM so this is equivalent to saying star this superscript setM equals SM just that we are just setting one field of that object. If you are doing a field sensitive analysis we'll track what that field is if you are not doing a field sensitive analysis then that's just equivalent to saying that you're just setting the contents to that. This is a different matter that only part of the contents are being set to it but we can just assume that the whole thing can also contain the pointer all right. That's an over approximation or that's a conservative analysis. So using that we are going to say okay so but before that I mean we don't have the points to set for this setM so just like we identified the points to set for SM ld1 we need to identify the points to set for this setM and that's our next thing. So this setM in context ld1 because that's where we are we are analyzing setM is now whatever the receiving object was at the call site which is m1 and whatever it was pointing to m1 0 was pointing to l0 m1 so now this setM ld1 can also point to l0 m1. Similarly this setM ld2 can also point to whatever m2 0 was pointing to and that's l0 m2. So this is our new points to graph because of the function called dispatch and now on this function called dispatch we are going to look at this body and update the points to graph. So let's do that next. So so far we have just implemented the dispatch rules that I had shown you earlier. We have copied the actual arguments to the formal arguments including the receiving object to the this keyword. Okay now we execute this interesting statement this.m equals SM and this is the most important part of this example and this.sm equals SM is just going to use the assignment rule that we had seen earlier which means that whatever this is pointing to that can now start pointing to whatever SM is pointing to. So this could point to l0 m1 and SM ld1 could point to l0 d1. So now I draw an edge from l0 m1 to l0 d1 and so this is the effect of the transfer across this assignment statement which basically uses the assign rule which is star this equals SM. This.m equals SM is analogous to saying star this equals SM in a field and sensitive analysis. If you were doing a field sensitive analysis however then you would additionally label the edge with the field name which is m. Recall that field sensitive analysis can only be done for safe languages and if it's an unsafe language then maybe you don't want to do a field sensitive analysis. It doesn't matter the discussion of the example remains the same just that the label would have been removed that's all. Similarly for m2 we would have to draw an edge because of the transfer across the second when we analyze set m in this context ld2 then we say that there is an edge from l0 m2 to l0 d2 and optionally labeled with m depending on whether we're doing a field sensitive analysis. Finally when we do base r1 equals our m1.getm so we are going to analyze getm in the context lr1 and we are going to again do the same actual argument as m1 and formal argument is this getm and so we say that whatever m1 was pointing to this getm would start pointing to this getm is being analyzed in context lr1 in this case so this getm is being analyzed in lr1 and so that's what we do so we say this getm lr1 points to whatever m1 in make context of main which is m10 is pointing to which basically means that this getm lr1 starts pointing to l0 m1 because that's what m10 is pointing to. Similarly this getm lr2 starts pointing to l0 m2 by virtue of transfer on the second instruction or second statement r2 equals m2.getm just the dispatch I've not yet executed the whole function. Okay based on that now this function is just going to return this dot m so I look at what is this what could this point to so this dot m is similar to saying star this so that's I mean that's as good as saying return star this from the perspective of a field insensitive points to analysis so I need to look at what is this going to point to so that's l0 m that's l0 m1 in case of the first call and then I look at what is that going to point to so that's l0 d1 that's what it may point to so now that's what gets returned and that's what gets assigned to r1 in context 0. Similarly that's what gets assigned to r2 in context 0 so we add two more edges r1 0 points to whatever you know whatever we figured out star this may point to which is l0 d1 and similarly r2 0 can point to whatever star this may point to and so it gets there. If it was a field sensitive analysis we would not say star this but we would say this dot f or this dot m and so in this case this is labeled with m so this would be considered and once again r2 0 we will get the same answer as it is in this example irrespective of whether we're doing a field sensitive or a field insensitive analysis. Finally the question that we wanted to answer which was whether this is you know statically resolvable we can see that indeed with a call context sensitive analysis of depth 1 for this example we are able to say confidently at compile time that r1 0 can only point to an abstract object l0 d1 which is of type capital d1 so this must be calling d1's f similarly r2 0 can only call can only point to an object which is of l0 d2 which is of type d2 so this must be calling d2's f and so we are able to resolve a virtual function call statically in this example. The key difference between this example and the previous example is the use is the modeling of the field m and notice that we are just modeling write or read to a field as a write or read to the receiving or to the actual object that contains that field so this is just like just like we were dealing with structs in c we are going to deal with these fields in an object-oriented language like c++ or java.
