Title: Compiler Design Module 84 : More DFA Examples
Video ID: g3msUTH45Hg
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

So now that we have looked at two different data flow analyses, namely constant propagation and liveness analysis, let's look at a couple more analyses which are based on data flow analysis. We are familiar with these analyses, but in the context of local transformations, these are common sub-expression elimination and copy propagation. So I'm going to very quickly go through these two analyses and show how they may be expressed as DFA's, but I'm not going to actually go into details or formalisms, and that will be something that we'll discuss in later lecture modules. 

So common sub-expression elimination. The idea is that if we have a program, so let's look at this particular example. Let's say this has x is equal to y plus z, w is equal to a plus b, and then there's a condition. If it's false, then it comes here, and again it says c equals a plus b, d equals y plus z. But if it's true, then it also does w equals w plus one. Now, notice that there are some common sub-expressions here. One is y plus z is common between x and d. So perhaps the computation here can be avoided, and a y plus z can be just replaced by x. Also, w equals a plus b and c equals a plus b. Even this looks like a common sub-expression, but we're going to see whether it is okay to actually consider this a common sub-expression or not, and can we replace it with w or something like that. To be able to answer these questions, what we can do is we can maintain a set of available expressions at every program point. So notice that I'm introducing a new term, and the term is available expressions. Basically, it means that the expressions that are available at that particular program point in some existing temporary registers. So for example, we're going to take some example to understand what are available expressions. 

So for example, we can say that, let's say at the beginning of the program, so let's assume this is the beginning of the program. Then let's assume that at the beginning of the program, there are no available expressions, and that's represented by the empty set phi. So this phi is basically representing the empty set. But then as soon as I execute the first statement, first instruction, x is colon equal to y plus z, I have one available expression in my set, and that available expression is y plus z, and where is it available? It is available in the register x or in the temporary x, or more generally in the variable x. So y plus z is available in the variable x, and that's what this tuple means. So it's a two-tuple. The first one is the variable name, and the second element is the expression that is available in that variable name. And notice the curly braces represents that there could be multiple such tuples in the same set, and so we're going to see more examples. So now let's look at what happens at this program point just after the statement w colon equals a plus b. Now my set of available expression has two elements. One is the element coming from before, which is y plus z is available in x. It is still available in x, but then there is an expression a plus b that is now available in w. And so that's how we're going to do this. Now let's look at this particular program point, which is just after the check of n greater than zero, and here we say y plus z is available in x, and a plus b is available in w. So nothing has really changed between the previous program point and the next program point. 

And we can continue this, and so far we have looked at available expressions inside a single basic block, but if I wanted to do this across the next basic block, then at this particular point, just before the statement w is colon equal to w plus one, what are all the available expressions? Well, everything that was available after n is greater than zero is also available here, which is y plus z is available in x, and a plus b is available in w. But what about after w is colon equal to w plus one? Now, after this, notice that a plus b was available in w, but now w has been changed, and now maybe a plus b plus one is available in w, but we don't know, our analysis has limitations, it cannot kind of do this transitive computation, so it's, you know, because the program basically says a plus b and then w plus one. And so, you know, let's say that, let's assume that our analysis cannot actually combine them to say, oh, it's a plus b plus one. At this point, basically, we can say that, we could either have said w plus one is available in w, but that doesn't make sense because w has just been overwritten. So actually, no expression is available in w, just after the statement, because I cannot say that a plus b is available in w, I cannot also say that w plus one is available in w, because w has been overwritten after the computation of w plus one. And so, at this point, I'll just say that y plus z is available in x, but the entry for w has been eliminated from my set of available expressions. And so the set of available expressions at this particular point is just x is, y plus z is available in x. 

Now let's look at this particular program point. Now notice that on one path, the set of available expressions has two elements, y plus z is available in x and a plus b is available in w. Whereas on the other path, there's only one element in my available set, which is five plus z is available in x. So what do you think should be available at the entry of this basic block before c is colon equal to a plus b? What should come here? And the answer is that it should be an intersection of these two available set, expression set, because a value is available at a particular program point if it is available in all possible paths to that program point. And so while a plus b is available in w, on one program path, it is not available on the second program path. On the other hand, x, y plus z is available in x on both program paths. And so the value here is going to be x, y plus z. And just continuing that, after doing c colon equals a plus b, we retain x, y plus z, and after d colon y plus z, we also retain x colon y plus z. Actually, to be more precise, I should have also added more elements there. So for example, I should have said, at this particular point, so this is fine, but at this particular point, a plus b is available in c, and at this point, y plus z is available in b, okay? All right, so this is the correct computation of available expressions. 

And now how do I do common sub-expression elimination based on available expressions? Well, the idea is pretty simple. If an expression is available just before a computation which recomputes that expression, then I can just replace that expression by the corresponding variable. So for example, this statement is computing a plus b, and what is available? y plus z. a plus b is not available, so I cannot really do anything. But let's look at this expression, and then d is colon equal to y plus z, and what is available? Well, y plus z is available in x, and so that means that I'm just repeating the computation, and I can actually now replace y plus z with x, and I can replace the statement with d is colon equal to x, right? So this is the way that I could extend common sub-expression elimination from a single basic block, something that we had seen earlier as a local optimization, to multiple basic blocks within a method body or a global optimization. And to do that, we basically implement this available expressions DFA that I'm going to explain more in the coming slides, and based on the values computing using the DFA, we can replace some of the expression computations with variable names, just like we did here. We replaced y plus z with x, and so now this becomes a copy from x to d. 

All right, so yeah, that's the second step. If the expression being computed is already available at the start of that statement, of the statement which is computing that expression, then we replace it with the pre-computed value, and so that's what this particular change is doing for us. 

All right, so what are some characteristics of the available expressions DFA? Well, the values are the set of available expressions. Okay, we have already seen that. For example, and every available expression is a tuple, a variable name and an expression, and we basically maintain a set of such tuples, and that's the value, and at every program point, so every program point has a set of available expressions as a value, and what is the partial order? What is the ordering, right? Well, as we say, set one is less than equal to set two, so recall that a value in this case is a set, so I'm saying that a value one is less than equal to value two, or set one is less than equal to set two. I basically want to define the less than equal to operator, and I'm defining it as such, if and only if set one is a subset of set two. So the ordering is basically that if there is a set S1, and there is another set S2, then S2 must be, if S2 is a subset of S1, then S2 is less than equal to S1, so we're just defining less than equal to in this way, and we're going to see why this makes sense very, very quick, very soon. Basically, if you look at our previous example, then the value that is basically coming in the two branches, incoming branches here, is one of them has only one element, the other has two elements, and what are we choosing? We are choosing, you know, we're basically taking the intersection of the two sets, and so we want to choose the less than equal to operator in such a way such that my greatest lower bound operator is the same as the intersection operator, just by looking at this example, all right? I'm not proving it formally or anything like that, but just by looking at this example, we want to say that the greatest lower bound operator should be the intersection operator, because for these cases, we want to have a single rule that says that if there are multiple values flowing in from multiple predecessors, then the value at the beginning of the successor should be the greatest lower bound of all those values. That's what we have done in the previous two dataflow analyses, namely constant propagation and liveness. In liveness, it was a backward dataflow analysis, and so it was about successors' values flowing into the predecessors' outs. Here it is, in this example and in the constant propagation, it's a forward dataflow analysis, and in both cases, we are interested in the GLB, greatest lower bound, right? And I claim that with this interpretation of less than equal to, we are going to find that the GLB of two sets is going to be the intersection of the two sets, all right? And we're going to see that very quickly. Before we discuss that, what is the conservative value here, all right? In my ordering, what is the conservative value? The conservative value is the empty set, because if I say that nothing is available, that basically giving me no information whatsoever, and that's not going to enable any transformation whatsoever, and so that is the conservative value here, all right? 

Okay, all right, so now we discuss the greatest lower bound, and it turns out that if we have this ordering, then if I want to say that there are two sets, let's say S1 and S2, and we want to find some S3, such that S3 is less than equal to S1, and S3 is less than equal to S2, then that such S3 is actually going to be nothing. I mean, the best such S3 is going to be an intersection of S1 and S2, and that's exactly the greatest lower bound operator that we were going to compute, right? So once again, what is the greatest lower bound? The greatest lower bound is basically an element S3, such that it is less than equal to both S1 and S2, which means that S3, notice that less than equal to is the subset operator, so that means S3 should be a subset of S1, and S3 should be a subset of S2. So what could be an S3 that is a subset of both S1 and S2? Well, the biggest such S3 is going to be the S1 intersection S2. So why do I consider the biggest? Because I'm interested in the greatest lower bound, and so that's what greatest lower bound actually evaluates to. Now, once again, I am not showing this formally or anything, just giving you an intuition, and we're going to discuss the formal foundations of data flow analysis in our subsequent modules. 

What should be the transfer function? So we have already discussed transfer functions when there is an S and there are multiple PIs, so let's say P1, P2, and so on, and then they are meeting here, then we basically say that the value here is basically computed using the GLB. And this is something that is common between this analysis and constant propagation analysis. The value that is computed at the beginning of the successor is basically the GLB of the values that are computed at the end of the predecessors. So that rule is exactly identical in both cases, just that the meaning of GLB has changed and the meaning of values has changed in this analysis. The other part of the transfer function is what happens across a statement. So if there is a set in that is coming in at the statement, then what is the set out? And that will depend on the characteristics of the statement. And so here are some intuition on how this is going to work. Well, F will return set in, so set out is, so we want to define this function F, which is the transfer function, so that set out equals F of set in. And F is just going to return set in, but it's going to modify it as follows. If S is modifying X, where X is the variable and Y is an expression, and if S is X colon equals Y plus Z, then we remove all the set elements that refer to X. So anything that has X as a variable, so for example, if I have something called X comma A plus B, then I'm going to remove that. Also, if I have, let's say D comma X plus C, even that I'm going to remove. Why am I going to remove that? Because X has now changed, and so it's no longer true that X plus C is available in D, because now X has changed, so X plus C has no longer available in D. Why did I remove the first one? Because X is no longer holding the value A plus B, it's actually now holding the value Y plus Z. So any set element that refers to X, either as a variable or as a part of an expression, is going to get eliminated in the set. And we are going to add X comma Y plus Z to the set of available expressions. And we'll discuss this in more detail later, but I just wanted to share some intuition. 

Okay, now the other data flow analysis that I mentioned at the beginning of this lecture module was copy propagation. And this actually I'm going to leave as an exercise, but you will find that this is actually very similar. The analysis will be very similar to the analysis of available expressions, except that now we limit ourselves to the statements of the form X is equal to Y. So in other words, expressions are basically just, the expression that we're going to consider for copy propagation are just going to be single variables. And the transformation logic based on analysis information is also going to be similar. So once we have computed the DFA based on our fixed point iteration algorithm, notice that I didn't really talk about the fixed point iteration because it's exactly the same as we have discussed for constant propagation and liveness, and that's the common structure of all these global optimization problems. And so once we compute the DFA values, then transformation logic is pretty simple. We basically say, for example, if it is a copy, if we know that it is a copy, then we can just replace the users of that variable with the copy variable. So for example, if I have A is colon equal to B available and I have some expression which says X equals A plus Y, then I can replace A with B and that would be my copy propagation. And later on, I can do liveness analysis to actually eliminate A is colon equal to B because once I replace all users of A with B, A will no longer be live and then I would be able to replace A colon, eliminate A is colon equal to B.
