Title: Compiler Design Module 122 : Introduction to Induction Variables
Video ID: KbJd0M_6nog
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

So, now we are going to discuss the techniques to actually do the symbolic analysis inside the loop. We have seen some examples where symbolic analysis can produce more precise answers. But what are the under-the-cover techniques that basically produce such more precise answers using symbolic analysis? And one of the very popular techniques is called induction variables. I am going to motivate the need for induction variables in this particular module and we are going to discuss what are induction variables more formally in the next module. So here is an example to motivate the need for induction variables. I have a program which says for j equals dot dot dot, so for j equals 1 to n, where j is being incremented by 1 in every iteration, aj equals 0. A is an array and you want to set the jth element of the array to 0. Now if I lower this down to the intermediate representation in 3 address code, then let's say a was an array of integers, then I would first do 4 into j to get the byte index inside a. Then I am going to get the address of a, so that's t2 equals ampersand a and then I am going to add the 2 and say t3 equals t1 plus t2 and finally I am going to say star t3 equals 0 and the 4 instructions in 3 address code together are going to form my statement in the high level language aj equals 0. Now the nice thing here is that we can see that t1 is 4 into j and t3 is the address of a plus 4 into j and so if I look at t1, t2 and t3 they have a certain property, t2 for example is loop invariant, it doesn't really matter what iteration you are in, irrespective of the iteration the value stored in t2 would always be the same which is the address of a. The value in t1 would get incremented by 4 on every iteration because it's 4 into j and j is getting incremented by 1 in every iteration and similarly the value in t3 will get incremented by 4 in every iteration because t3 is nothing but the sum of a loop invariant variable which is t2 and a variable that is getting incremented by 4 on every iteration. So such variables that get incremented by a constant stride on every iteration I am going to call them induction variables and we are going to define that more formally later on. But once I am able to identify these induction variables, I can perform a transformation and in this case I can basically do the following, I can say t3 equals ampersand a because it's loop invariant, I can just hoist it at the top of the loop and then I can say star t3 equals 0, t3 equals t3 plus 4. So instead of actually doing the multiplication which may be expensive on your architecture, we can replace it with an addition because we know that t3 is going to increment by 4 every time because j is getting incremented by 1 by every time and t3 has a multiplicative factor of 4 on the increment side. And so I have star t3 equals 0 and t3 equals t3 plus 4. Now this type of transformation from the left to the right is called strength reduction and because it is strength reduction because you are reducing the strength of the operators from multiplication to addition hoping that addition is going to be faster on your architecture. But how do you do this kind of analysis and you know what is the nature of the symbolic analysis that will allow us to do this kind of reasoning. So to understand that in more detail, let's look at this longer example. Let's say I have this body of a loop and then the first instruction has a label loop and the last instruction has some condition based on which it either jumps to loop, jumps back to the loop or it exits the loop. Now if I look at the body it's saying b equals a, a equals a plus 1, c equals a plus b and so on. And what I can do now is I can try to express the values at the end of an iteration based on the values at the beginning of the iteration. So this is similar to the available expressions analysis that we are talking about and this time I am interested in the transfer function for the entire loop body and I am going to do that using a map m. So let m be a map of variable to value at the start of the loop body and we want to express the effect of one iteration in terms of m and that's my transfer function for the loop body of this particular loop. So effect of one iteration in terms of m as a function of m. So let's try to do that. So at the very beginning we have m a, m b, m c, m d, m e and so on because those are the values that a, b, c, d, e etc hold respectively. And so after the first statement, so at the end of each statement I want to know what is the new value or what is the current value. So at the end of the first statement which is b equals a, I know that the new current value of b is now instead of m b it has now become m a because I have just assigned a to b. Now at the end of the second statement I have a equals m a plus 1 because I am saying a equals a plus 1, the current value of a is m a which is this value that was at the start of the loop iteration and so a equals m a plus 1. Then I have c equals a plus b. Now this time a already is updated to m a plus 1 and b has been updated to m a and so what is a plus b? That's just m a plus 1 plus m a or in other words 2 into m a plus 1 and so that's the new value of c. Alright and so this is how I'm summarizing the effect of you know the first prefix of the first three statements of the loop iteration based on the transfer function that I have described so far and I can keep doing this. So for example I have d equals r plus b then I just say d equals m r plus m b, d equals m r plus m a because the current value of b is m a because of this first assignment d equals a. E equals f that just translates to e equals m f. f equals read. Now read is some unknown operation I don't really know what it is it's coming from outside the map the value of on the right-hand side of this operation is coming from outside the map m and so I have a special value called unknown and say f equals unknown. Alright and unknown is nothing similar to our the bottom value in our semi lattice. And then I have g equals 2 into f but f we know at this point is unknown so 2 into unknown is nothing but unknown. a equals a plus 1 so a was already m a plus 1 and this time I'm again adding one to it so it becomes m a plus 2. And finally p equals p plus 1 gives me p equals m p plus 1 and q equals m p plus a becomes me q equals m p plus m a plus 3 because p is m p plus 1 and a is m a plus 2. Alright so this is the summary of the transfer function at the end of each statement at the end of the entire iteration whatever are the values that we get here so I can now generate a new map m prime for all the variables and I can express m prime in terms of m based on the analysis that I have done and that is basically my transfer function for the entire loop which is specifying the map at the end of the iteration in terms of the map at the beginning of the iteration. So let m prime be a var2val map at the end of an iteration I would be able to say that m prime r equals m r notice that r is not changed m prime a equals m a plus 2 we already figured that out m prime p equals m p plus 1 and m prime f is unknown. Alright so that's the that's what we get at the end of each statement. At the end of i minus 1 iteration so also notice that I'm only referring I'm only using four variables I didn't for basically you know create a mapping in m prime for all the variables I just created a mapping for four variables and that's because only four variables are appearing on the right hand side of my transfer function you know m a m r m f and m p and so across multiple iterations these are the variables for which I would be really interested in. Now once I am able to identify the transfer function for a single iteration I would be able to summarize this into the transfer function of multiple iterations assuming that these transfer functions are either loop invariant for example r is loop invariant so m prime r is nothing but m r but a is an induction variable in the sense that it's getting incremented by a constant offset on every iteration. How do I know that a is an induction variable because if I look at the function for a m prime a equals m a plus 2 and so it's a constant offset by which a is incrementing on a single iteration similarly m prime p equals m p plus 1 so p is also an induction variable and then m prime f equals unknown and so f is not an induction variable. Now once I've been able to identify these relationships then I can generalize this for i iterations so you know right now I just have this for one iteration and m prime is expressed in terms of m for one iteration I can do the same thing for i iterations so instead of doing it for i iterations let's do it for i minus 1 iterations because we're going to you know deal with the i-th iteration in a more fine-grained manner. So what will happen after i iterations what do you think? r would remain the same it doesn't matter because r is not being modified inside the loop. a would be incremented by 2 i minus 1 times so what would a become and the new a and that's m i minus 1 a would be m a plus 2 into i minus 1 alright similarly m prime p would be m p plus 1 into i minus 1 and so on because if every iteration is incrementing by constant offset after i minus iterations I would have incremented by that constant offset multiplied by the number of iterations. So at the end of i minus 1 iterations I get m prime a equals m a plus 2 into i minus 1 and m prime p equals m p plus 1 into i minus 1. Alright so based on that I can take the next step so once I know what are the values at the beginning of the iteration so these are the values that are at the end of the i minus 1 iteration and these are also the values that are at the beginning of the i-th iteration so just before the first statement of the i-th iteration I'm going to have these values for r, a, p and if and based on that I can compute some of the values at the end of each statement of the i-th iteration and that's my next slide at the end of each statement in the i-th iteration if I want to know what is b so I look at what is m a, m a is m a plus 2 into i minus 1 and so b equals a so that just becomes b equals m a plus 2 into i minus 1. Now the second statement is a equals a plus 1 so a equals m a plus 2 into i minus 1 plus 1. c equals a plus b and that becomes 2 into m a plus 4 i minus 3 so basically I'm just substituting for the LHS using the LHS of these equations that I have for i minus 1 iterations and I'm kind of doing the same thing across the i-th iteration preserving the values and then substituting just like we have done for a single iteration. So what are we trying to do? We are trying to wherever possible represent values as a fine expressions on the loop iteration index so in my previous slide but the loop iteration index was i and wherever possible notice that in some cases it was not possible in which case we were using unknown but wherever possible we want to represent the values as a fine expressions on the loop iteration index and based on that once I'm able to do that then I would be able to perform such transformations because once I know that in the j-th iteration j is going to be c0 plus c1 into i because based on this analysis I was able to identify that at the j-th iteration if I want to write j as a as in a fine expression on the loop iteration variable i I would probably get an expression like c0 plus c1 into i and then I can write a simple transformation path which says if you see this pattern c0 plus c1 into i just initialize c0 j to c0 plus c1 and then on every iteration at the end of the iteration do j is equal to j plus c1 and that's going to give you the same effect and you're going to have implemented this trend reduction optimization or transformation based on this information that the j is a fine expression on the loop iteration variable.
