Title: Compiler Design Module 173 : WHYs of Undef and Poison Value Semantics
Video ID: zP7ck5QF-Bk
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

So far we have been talking about the operational semantics, first of the Poisson value and then of the UNDEF value. But much of the discussion may have felt a little mechanical because we're basically saying, oh, this is what the designer chose for Poisson or this is what the designer chose for UNDEF. We have, you know, through our discussion been trying to motivate why those choices were made. But this particular module is dedicated exclusively for the why's of these semantics. In particular, I'm going to start with the why's of UNDEF semantics. I'm going to compare them with what are the Poisson semantics and why such semantics have been chosen. Because it's, I mean, I guess, you know, that the why is generally more important than the what. And so let's try to get, you know, have a full module on just discussing the why's once again. Sometimes you're going to be repeating stuff that you've discussed, but some of these things are going to be fresh. So you know, let's say that I have an expression in my language and once again I'm using the LLVM IR syntax, which is x equals UNDEF plus UNDEF. And you know, one thing that we have said so far is that each time UNDEF is used a different value can be observed. So each allows different values on each observation. So why is this kind of feature of UNDEF used? Why not just say that whatever is the UNDEF value, you know, just have one constant UNDEF value or something like that? Well, the answer is, you know, for example, basically the compiler is going to do these transformations and some of these UNDEF values are going to get stored somewhere or they're going to be moved around and then some value is going to be used somewhere, etc. Now, if the compiler is forced to basically use the same UNDEF value everywhere, so I mean, one semantics of the UNDEF value could be that it is some random value, but it is fixed everywhere. So once you say x equals UNDEF, then x would be the same everywhere. Then that basically requires the compiler to save and restore that garbage value, that random value in a register or something like that, or basically maintain extra memory state for that random value, which was actually an UNDEF value, which could have been anything. And so allowing that different observations of the UNDEF value can potentially turn different results, basically relieves the compiler of having to do the same restore, right? And basically every time an UNDEF value is read or something like that, the compiler can just choose any random value at that point. And if the UNDEF value is being used at two points or three points, then each of those two points or three points can have different values and so on. So that's the basic spirit of this particular property of the UNDEF value, which allows different values on each observation. The other thing I want to point out is that UNDEF plus UNDEF is no different from saying y equals UNDEF and x equals y plus y. Some people like to make this distinction, oh, I mean, okay, UNDEF plus UNDEF can give you different values on the first UNDEF and the second UNDEF, but why not just say y equals UNDEF and then x equals y plus y? So when you say y equals UNDEF, then that's the only observation of UNDEF and maybe you choose some random value here. And then when you say x equals y plus y, then that random value is used twice, right? So for example, if the random value that you chose for y was three, then x equals three plus three would be six. And that would give you nice properties like, oh, x will always be even and things like that. But this kind of distinction between UNDEF plus UNDEF versus y equals UNDEF and x equals y plus y doesn't make sense because after all, when we are doing compiler transformations, one of the kind of transformations that we do is, for example, constant propagation. And so if y equals UNDEF and x equals y plus y, I can simply constant propagate UNDEF everywhere. And now these two are actually equivalent. In fact, I mean, more generally, I'm using the example of constant propagation, but more generally, the IR needs to have the semantics which are called replace all users with semantics. So in many places in our compiler algorithms, we basically change some expression and say, okay, now replace all users of this expression with this value or something like that. And those kinds of semantics are kind of ingrained into most compiler algorithms. And the only way you can have those semantics is by treating these two cases identically. You can't make a distinction between the second case and the first case. In both cases, if y was UNDEF, then if you say y plus y, then it's basically like two observations have been made for y in this case. And so x can potentially be an odd number because in the first observation, y can return two. And then the second observation, maybe y can return three. And you can take any other constant as well. So I mean, yeah, so that hopefully answers the question UNDEF plus UNDEF and y plus y have to be treated in the same way. They can't be treated in a different way. The other thing is, why do we care about UNDEF having different valuations at different points? This is something we have used, we have discussed in one of the previous modules as well, but I'm going to repeat it here for the completeness of discussion. So let's say I say A equals UNDEF. So basically means A can take any random value within the type of A. So let's say it was I32, then it can take any of the two to the power 32 values. And then say B equals multiplication of I32A with two. So that's just A into two. And then C equals AND of I32A into three. And now a compiler may want to say, figure out and kind of do this transformation that just changed the multiplication to just saying a constant assignment two, because after all A is just an UNDEF value, it can take any value. And maybe the value that I want to give it is one in this example. And so one into two is two. I can make this, I mean, I can basically always do refinement, which means I can go from more non-determinism to less non-determinism. And so that can allow the compiler to just change the statement to multiplication of one into two, which is just two. On the other hand, here's a third instruction says AND of A comma three. So A and three. And once again, I can assume A to be let's say three, maybe, and this time three and three would be three. And so I can just kind of transform this to C equals three. So notice that this transformation is legal only if I can basically have different valuations of A at different points in the program. So in the second instruction, I'm using the valuation one. In the third instruction, I'm using the valuation three. And so it is in many cases, I mean, this is just a small example, but there will be many cases where you don't want to keep track of, oh, this was the last value that I had used for this particular undef. I mean, that would be very difficult for a compiler to do. And so a much easier option is that whenever an undef value is observed, it can just return any value. So if it is observed 10 times, it can return. It can basically generate 10 different random values for that particular time. Okay. The other thing is that undef is more deterministic than poison. What do I mean by more deterministic? It has, whatever are the sets of behaviors that the poison value can potentially have, the non deterministic choices of behaviors, the undef value only allows a subset of those behaviors. So let's look at an example to see that. I mean, intuitively, this is very clear because the poison value basically says, oh, if you do anything with it, then it's poison. If you observe it, then it's poison. If you branch on it, then it becomes UB. If you divide by it, then it becomes UB. Undef also says that if you divide by it, it becomes UB. If you branch on it, it becomes UB. But it kind of makes things more deterministic. For example, if you multiply it by two, then you only get even numbers. Whereas poison just say you get poison. And poison, the poison value basically has more possible behaviors than the set of even numbers because the poison value can be substituted with any value, but the set of even numbers can only be substituted with an even number. And so that's what I mean when I say undef is more deterministic than poison. And this can also be seen in the types of transformations that are legal for undef versus what are legal for poison. So if I have a code which says X equals undef star two, then it's not okay to convert that to X equals one because undef star two will always give me an even number, whereas X equals one is kind of an odd number. So I cannot choose, there's no valuation of the undef value, which multiplied by two gives me one. And so among let's say this I32 type or something like that. And so this is not a legal transformation. On the other hand, if I say X equals poison into two, I can always convert that to X equals one because poison into two is just poison. And so X equals poison, which means it's a non-deterministic error value. And so I can always change it to some deterministic value without adding any extra behaviors. And so this would be a valid refinement because I will go from more non-deterministic behavior to less non-deterministic behavior in this case. Whereas in this case, I will go from, I'm basically generating a behavior that was not present in the original program. Here I'm generating a behavior that was present, that was one of the possible behaviors in the original program. Now because undef is more deterministic than poison, and because we can always go from more non-determinism to less non-determinism, it is okay to convert poison to undef. So if there is a statement which says X equals poison, it's always okay to change that to X equals undef. Because as I just said, undef is less non-deterministic than poison. So whatever are the behaviors that are possible for the poison value are a superset of the behaviors that are possible for the undef value. And so it's always okay to go from more non-determinism to less non-determinism. On the other hand, it is not okay to go in the other direction because we can't go from less non-determinism to more non-determinism. I can't change undef to poison, but I can change poison to undef. Now, of course, when there's more non-determinism, there's more optimization opportunity. So if I'm dealing with the poison value, then typically I'll have more optimization opportunity than if I'm dealing with the undef value. And you're going to see some examples. So the first example that I have here is let's say X equals poison into Y. So that just means X equals poison because poison operated upon with anything else is basically just poison. And then I say, if X, if some expensive operation on X, then do something. Now, because branch on poison is UB, I'm sure that X is poison. So branch on poison is UB. So basically I can just say that this whole code is unreachable, right? So this whole code is unreachable or this triggers UB. I'm sure that this triggers UB. And so if something triggers UB, I can basically replace it with unreachable. Or the compiler can say that, oh, this code can never be executed because if it gets executed, then it's undefined behavior and anything can happen in undefined behavior. So the easy thing to say is that this, you know, just, I mean, just pretend as though it doesn't even exist. And so that's what transformation to the unreachable instruction means because I'm sure that this triggers UB. But if I look at the same operation with the undef value instead of the poison value, I say X equals undef star Y and then I do if expensive X. Now it is not okay to transform this to unreachable. You may wonder why, because after all branching on undef is also undefined, UB is also undefined behavior. But notice that when I multiply undef with Y, then maybe I end up with a deterministic value because undef into zero just gives me zero. So if Y was zero, then X is no longer a non-singleton set of values. It's a singleton set of values. And the branching on a singleton set of values is well-defined. And so it is not okay to say that this whole thing can be changed to unreachable. All right? Because if Y was zero, then this whole thing has well-defined behavior. So this does not necessarily trigger UB. The code on the right does not necessarily trigger UB. It triggers UB for some values of Y, for most values of Y, but there exists a value of Y, which is zero, for which this code does not trigger UB. And so I cannot replace this whole code by just the unreachable statement because possibly there are executions there which are well-defined, which are not going to trigger UB. Here's another example. So let's say I have two integers. I'm using C syntax now, and I have two variables, I and N. These are integer type. And say I have this loop where I'm computing N plus one. And one of the common transformations that compilers like GCC do is they convert I is less than N plus one to I is less than equal to N. The question is, is this legal? And I'm going to answer this question by using different semantics, possible semantics for signed integer overflow, right? So of course, I mean, if N was any kind of normal number, which is not like, you know, where N plus one was not going to trigger some error condition or something like that, it's not going to trigger an overflow, then it makes sense that if I is less than N plus one, then it must be less than equal to N. But what happens if N plus one overflows? So for example, if N was int max, then int max plus one is what? I mean, if I use the semantics that int max plus one actually wraps around, then int max plus one would become int min, which is a negative number, large negative number, which is, you know, in the two's complement in representation. And so this would become, you know, if N was int max, then this would become I is less than int min, and that is always false, because, you know, I being an integer can never be less than the minimum possible representable value. And so I is less than int min would also be false. And so this loop will never be executed in the source program. But if I look at the target program, then I is less than equal to N would translate to I is less than equal to int max, because that's the case we're using when N was equal to int max. And I is less than equal to N to max would be always true. And so while in the original program, the loop would never be executed. In the new program, the loop would actually be an infinite execution, because I'll just keep executing until forever, because I would always be less than equal to int max, unless, you know, in the body, we have some way of getting out or something like that. But this condition is always going to evaluate it true, and this condition will evaluate to false for N equals int min. So with wraparound semantics in two's complement representation, this transformation is not legal, right? Because N plus one would basically, you know, because of this corner case when N would be equal to int max. And that's why we use undefined behavior semantics in C. But what about in LLVM? And we have said that, you know, we can use undefined behavior semantics in the source language, but if you use the undefined behavior semantics in the intermediate representation, then that thwarts optimization opportunities like hoisting and other things. And so in the intermediate language, we have a choice. We can either, you know, assign the value of poison to N plus one. And so if I say int max plus one, that's an overflow, then I basically say it yields poison. So that's option number one. And under that option, this transformation is actually okay. Because if N was int max, then int max one plus one would yield poison. And then I's less than poison would also yield poison. And then a branch based on poison would be undefined behavior. And so I don't need to consider this particular case was when N equals int max. Because when N equals int max, the value of the original program triggers UB. And so in other words, I don't need to consider that particular case because you know, if some case triggers UB, as a compiler, I don't need to worry about that case. In other words, I don't need to worry about the case when N equals int max. And so I can transform it as such, because for all other values of N, which are not int max, this transformation actually is a legal transformation. It was only this value int max, which was causing a problem. And now that we have used the semantics that int max plus one will yield poison, or any signed integer overflow would yield poison. We know that when N equals int max, the original program will cause UB. And so we don't need to account for that case. We don't need to consider that case. And for all other cases, this transformation is legal. And so that's why compilers like GCC routinely make such transformations. In fact, these are the kind of transformations that will be required that are even kind of taken for granted when we are talking about lots of different transformations like algebraic simplification, even discussed in this particular course. What if int max plus one was not poison? What if LLVM decided that int max plus one is actually undef? It turns out even then, this transformation is okay, because if N plus one was undef, then I would say I is less than undef. And from I equals zero to I is less than undef, the compiler can reason about the fact that whatever undef gives me, it's okay, I can always change that to I is less than equal to N, because I is less than undef is basically going to give me some non-deterministic value. It can be either true or false, and it's okay to change that to I is less than equal to N. So here we have seen an example where the signed integer overflow, irrespective of whether it's treated as poison or undef, allows a transformation. Next I'm going to discuss an example where we're going to distinguish, I'm going to say, oh, poison is better, but undef is not going to work. So once again, let's look at the signed integer overflow property. And let's say there's a check in my code which says if A plus X is greater than, signed greater than, that's what the subscript S means, A. Is it okay to change this code to X greater than zero? And of course, I mean, if I look at the integer arithmetic, this should be okay, but I have to worry about all these corner cases. And it turns out that if X, A plus X, yields poison on overflow, so if A plus X overflows, and if that yields poison, then this is okay, because if A plus X overflows, then that would yield poison, and then poison greater than A would yield poison. And so poison value can always be determinized into a more deterministic value, which is X greater than zero, because poison can be substituted for anything. And so if A plus X yields poison on overflow, then A plus X greater than A would also yield poison. And so this whole value would be poison, and so that it's okay to kind of yield, this would be a less non-deterministic value than poison, because anything can be substituted for poison. And so you can choose substitute X is greater than zero, even in that case. Of course, when it's not going to overflow, then this is a valid transformation. But let's consider the case when A plus X signed integer overflow yields undef instead of poison. I argue that this transformation is no longer legal. And here's the case. Let's say A was int max and X was one. When A is int max, then int max plus X, and X was one, then int max plus one basically would be undef, right? So in this particular case, this value would become undef. When A is int max and X is one, then A plus X will become undef, and A would become int max. Now what does undef greater than int max evaluate to? Recall that undef basically represents any value in that type, in the integer type. But whatever the value I choose for undef, it can never be greater than int max because int max is the largest possible integer in the integer type. And so undef greater than int max would always evaluate to false. Whereas X greater than zero may evaluate to true. And in this particular case, because X is one, one greater than zero would evaluate to true. And so these two are not going to evaluate to the same thing for this corner case when A was equal to int max and then X was equal to one. And so A plus X sine integer arithmetic overflow, if that yields undef, then some kind of common transformations that we take for granted do not remain legal. And that's why, that's one of the reasons, perhaps one of the reasons why the LLVM designers decided that sine integer overflow should be poisoned and not undef. There's also another question that comes up, which is why care about the undef value at all? And the answer is basically simple. And this is again something that we have discussed previously. The answer is that undef basically gives you more predictable behavior. Some languages which will basically assume, have semantics that say that uninitialized value should give you any random value, but not, you know, it's not an error to read an undefined value. It's basically, or uninitialized value. It's basically saying that you get any random value. C does not have that. C says that if you read an uninitialized value, that's undefined behavior. But some other language could potentially say that if you read an uninitialized value, you can get a random value. And so in that case, if I have int x and then I have to print x star zero, then the programmer would be well within his or her rights to assume, expect that this particular program is going to print zero. And I mean, on the right, I show the corresponding LLVM transformation of this program, which is just like, you know, allocate a 32-bit integer. That's i32. x equals allocate i32. So x gets some address in the memory. Then t1 equals load x, which is just going to return the value of x. It's going to, in this case, return some uninitialized value. In our case, we're going to assume, in the case of LLVM, we're going to assume that this is going to be the undef value. Then I'm going to multiply that value with zero. And in LLVM case, if t1 was undef, then that's just going to give me zero. And then I'm going to print zero. But if, for example, I had chosen the Poisson value for x in this case, then t2 would also have been Poisson. And then when I try to print a Poisson value, then either, you know, maybe no print would have happened because maybe I was going to branch on Poisson or something like that. And that would have caused undefined behavior, or I could have potentially printed any random value. And both those cases would be unexpected or unintuitive results for the programmer in many cases. And so the undef value basically caters to expected semantics, which is not so much about optimization, but more about understandability or kind of programmability of the particular language. So these are the two choices. If t1 equals undef, then you print zero. If t1 equals Poisson, you could potentially get UB or you print just some random value. And so both those cases may be not acceptable for certain programming languages. And as an IR designer, you need to cater for multiple languages. And that's why you need both kinds of things. The other kind of question here is why do we consider branch on undef to be UB? And once again, I'm going to cite some common transformations that compilers do and say that unless we do this, why does branch on undef has to be UB? Well, the other option could have been that when you branch on undef, then any of the branches can be taken non-deterministically. That was the other option that the language designer could have taken. But let's look at this example, this transformation example. So if X equals U, where U represents an undef value, then FX, right? It's a common transformation. This is the global value numbering transformation. It says if X equals U, FU. I mean, you can think of this as a kind of extension of copy propagation. I mean, this is called global value numbering. Also, I mean, kind of some form of common sub-expression elimination and copy propagation. But basically if X equals U and you know that in the if block, you can replace X with U. And so you can just basically replace X with U and this should be a legal transformation. But it turns out that if branch on undef was not UB, then this is not a legal transformation. Because if branch on undef was, let's say could potentially take some random branch, then even if let's say U was undef, then X equals U is also going to be undef because it can either be true or false. X equals U is also going to be undef. And then if undef, I could potentially randomly choose to take this branch or that branch. Now let's take the case when X was equal to, let's say one and U was equal to two or U was equal to undef, right? Now X equals U is going to give me undef and then I'm going to execute F1 non-deterministically. I mean, I'm going to choose one of these branches, whether the if or the else branch. And let's say I chose the if branch, then I'm going to execute F1. But in the target program, I'm going to execute F undef. And these two things are totally different. I mean, in one case you are basically, let's say F for the print function. In one case, you're going to be printing one. In the other case, you're going to be printing some random value. And so this transformation is not legal if branch on undef was not UB. On the other hand, if branch on undef is UB, then this whole program would basically just give you me undefined behavior. And now, in that case, it's okay to translate it into this. I want to point out that U represents a potentially undef value. So if it is undef, then this whole thing is totally UB. And so it's okay to kind of transform it into this. If U was not undef, then also it is okay to translate into this. And so that's the common reasoning that the compilers use. And these semantics aid that kind of reasoning to be able to do such transformations. And that is one of the reasons why branch on undef needs to be UB.
