Title: Compiler Design Module 132 : Affine Array Accesses
Video ID: G2imHbHT_wo
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

So, so far we have looked at how we could potentially reorder the iteration space by either switching the order of different iteration indices or by changing the axes altogether. But what we haven't discussed is what about memory accesses that are happening within each iteration and what about all the data dependencies that result from those memory accesses. So here's an example. Let's say I have a two depth loop nest for i equals 0, i is less than 10, i plus plus, for j equals 0, j is less than 20, j plus plus and I say a of i plus j mod 20 equals i into j. So I'm accessing, I'm writing something to this particular memory location on every iteration. If the iteration is characterized by i comma j, then I'm writing to a of i plus j mod 20. And I want to figure out which iterations are data dependent. In other words, one of the preconditions of two iterations to be data dependent, which means that the writes or reads by one iteration depend on the writes or reads by the other iteration or should preserve the order between the two to achieve the same result. Then we basically want to know, one of the things we want to know is which of these iterations access the same location of memory. Because if two iterations access different locations of memory, then clearly they are not data dependent and they may be potentially reordered with respect to each other. But if they are accessing the same memory location, it is possible that they are data dependent. So in this particular case, I would basically say, let's say that two iterations are characterized by i comma j and i prime comma j prime. And then I'm basically interested in figuring out which of these, you know, what are the constraints on i, j, i prime, j prime such that the two iterations would basically access the same location. And so that constraint is given on the right. i plus j mod 20 should equal i prime plus j prime mod 20. If that's true, then i comma j and i prime comma j prime would access the same location. And that's easy to see because the address that's being accessed is i plus j mod 20. And so this basically, this set of i, j, i prime, j prime basically represents the set of data dependent iterations, pairs of iterations, sets of pairs of iterations which are data dependent, where pairs are represented by i comma j and i prime comma j prime. And you can notice that this particular constraint is non-affine. Recall what is an affine constraint and affine constraint is basically a constraint that can be represented as an affine expression which is summation c i x i plus c 0 equals 0 or, you know, if it's an equality and greater than equal to 0 if it's an inequality where c i's including c 0 are constants and x i's are the variables on which this expression is affine. But this particular expression is not affine on i, j, i prime, j prime because there is a modulus operator which is not covered by our affine expressions. Let's take another example and in this case I just changed my address of array access from i plus j mod 20 to some affine expression 2j plus 10 minus i, alright. So this is just an affine expression that represents the location of the memory for the i comma jth iteration. And now if I want to check what are the iterations that are data dependent, once again I have i, j, i prime, j prime such that 2j plus 10 minus i equals 2j prime plus 10 minus i prime. And now this whole expression here is basically an affine expression on j and i and i prime and j prime. In fact I can simplify this to something like this that i, j, i prime, j prime such that the difference between j's is twice, the difference between i's is twice the difference between j's, okay. And this expression is affine and that's just a fallout of the fact that all memory accesses are affine. Now it turns out that many useful programs or most useful programs actually have affine accesses to memory with respect to their surrounding loop indices. And so we are going to focus on such programs where my array accesses are affine. So let's define what does it mean for an array access to be affine. An array access in a loop is affine if and only if the loop bounds are expressible as affine expressions of surrounding loop indices and symbolic constants. Recall that symbolic constants include your regular constants like 2, 3, 4, 100, 200 whatever and also constants that are invariant or expressions or variables that are loop invariant for the entire loop nest and so that those will also qualify as symbolic constants. So the loop bounds should be expressible as affine expressions of surrounding loop indices and symbolic constants and this is something that we have already been assuming in our polyhedral framework. We are basically saying that the bounds of the iteration indices are affine expressions so that I can create a polyhedral space. So the first constraint is not new to us at all. But here is the second constraint. The index for each dimension of the array is also an affine expression on surrounding loop indices and symbolic constants. So when we make an array access, it could be a two dimensional array access for example. Each dimension of that particular array access should be expressible as an affine expression of the surrounding loop indices and symbolic constants. So in our previous example 2i plus j minus 10 is an affine expression of the surrounding loop indices. So hence that is an affine expression. i plus j mod 20 is not an affine expression of the surrounding loop indices. And notice that this requirement is only on every dimension of the array. In the previous example, our array was one dimensional but if it was a two dimensional array then the access should have affine expressions on for each dimension of that particular array and we are going to see examples on what that really means. Okay, so here are some examples. Let's say I assume that the surrounding loop indices are i, j and k and let's also assume that they have affine bounds which is basically our first requirement for an array access to be an affine access and let's just assume that n is a loop invariant just for my examples. Now is x 2 into i plus j an affine access? The answer is yes because i and j are surrounding loop indices. They have affine bounds and 2 into i plus j is a single dimension. So x is a single dimension array and 2 into i plus j is an affine expression that is indexing into that dimension. So this one is affine. Let's look at the second one y i comma j plus n. Now this time the array is two dimensional. The first dimension is indexed using the affine expression i and the second dimension is indexed using the affine expression j plus n. Notice that n is a loop invariant variable so I can treat it as a constant. And now both i and j plus n are affine expressions and so y i comma j plus n is also an affine array access. Similarly, let's look at the third example z of i plus 3 into j plus 2 comma j. Once again it's a two dimensional array access where each dimension is an affine expression of the surrounding loop indices. And finally x i comma j comma k this is a three dimensional array access and once again each dimension is basically an affine expression of the surrounding loop indices. i is a affine expression j is an affine expression and so is k. So all these examples of array accesses are affine array accesses. Let's look at some examples of accesses that are not affine. For example if I have x of i into j where i and j were surrounding loop indices, x of i into j is not an affine array access. Another example y of i into n plus j where n is a, where i and j are surrounding loop indices and n is a loop invariant or a symbolic constant. And once again I don't consider i into n plus j to be an affine expression because we are multiplying by a symbolic constant but we want the multiplication to be only with actual constant not just symbolic constant. So this will be considered to be not affine. So this is a subtle point while addition to the symbolic constant can be still considered affine multiplication with a symbolic constant will not be considered affine. The multiplicative factor should be a proper constant not a symbolic constant. So affine array accesses, we are going to use a four tuple F small f capital B small b to represent one array access in a loop nest. Notice that when I was talking about affine array accesses, it's possible that the array access is not necessarily in the deepest nest, deepest level of the loop nest. It's possible that the array access is, if it's a 2D loop nest maybe just inside the first loop we have an array access and then we have the second loop, the inner loop after that. And in that case also that would be an affine access which would just depend on the loop index of the outer loop and not on the inner loop. In any case, all such array accesses would be called affine accesses. In every affine array access can be represented by a four tuple capital F small f capital B small b. We are already familiar with capital B and small b which is basically representing the space of iterations. Recall that capital B and small b can be used to represent the iteration space, the polyhedron of the iteration space and we are only adding two extra parameters which is capital F and small f which is basically going to represent what are the affine expression with respect to those loop iteration indices which basically specifies the address of the memory access, multi-dimensional address of the memory access. Notice that I am representing memory accesses also as multi-dimensional accesses because the arrays can be multi-dimensional. So I use a four tuple F F B B to represent one array access in a loop nest. What does it mean? If the loop nest uses a vector of index variables i, then it must be true that B i plus B is greater than or equal to zero. So in other words, that iteration vector i must belong to the iteration space of the loop nest in which the array access is occurring and the accessed array element is capital F i plus small f and notice that this is nothing but this just represents an arbitrarily affine expression on the surrounding loop indices, loop iteration indices. So here capital F is called the coefficient matrix because it is basically representing the coefficients of each of the loop indices. So this is in my summation C i x i plus C zero equals zero, the C i's are basically specified in capital F and C zeros are basically specified in small f and because there could be multiple such equations, we basically have for each of the dimensions of the array. For example, the first dimension could be two x plus three, the second dimension could be four x plus five and so capital F would have two rows, two comma three and four comma five for example. So we are going to see more examples, but overall because my memory access can be multi-dimensional, capital F could have more than one rows and similarly small f could have more than one row because small f is nothing but the constant part of my affine expression. Okay, here are some examples. So let's say my surrounding loop iteration indices were i and j, so I represent it by this vector i j and now my access which could be basically either in the inner loop or in the outer loop, it doesn't matter, that it would matter when we specify capital B comma small b, I am not going to specify capital B comma small b here, I am just going to specify what are the capital F and small f because we have already had some introduction to capital B and small b when we are talking about the polyhedral iteration space. So for A i minus one, how do I write i minus one using f and f, well it's nothing but one zero, so f becomes one zero and small f becomes minus one. So you see this one zero i j plus minus one is nothing but one into i plus zero into j that becomes me i plus minus one and that's i minus one. So for an array access which is i minus one, my capital F is one zero and small f is minus one, I am assuming my iteration index vector is i j, okay and notice that depending on the order of my iteration index vector, the capital F and small f may change and I am going to, I mean it really doesn't matter what order I choose depending on the order my matrices will change and I need to be consistent, I need to use one order and based on that I will use all the matrices, I basically specify all the matrices. For example, if the order was j comma i, then I would just switch the columns of capital F and say zero one, okay, here's another example, b i comma j, now this time it's a two dimensional array access because the two dimensions are separated with the comma, the first dimension in this case is i and the second dimension is index is j and so what is capital F, it's just one zero zero one and small f is zero zero and you can see this because if you multiply capital F with i j, what you get is nothing but i j because this is nothing but the identity matrix and that's exactly what you want in your, as your indices for this particular array access, all the constant terms are zero. Here are some more examples, so let's say I wanted to access y j comma j plus one, once again it's a two dimensional array access, the coefficient matrix in this case is zero one zero one, both of them have a coefficient of one for j and a coefficient of zero for i and the constant terms are zero and one, for the first dimension the constant zero, for the second dimension the additive constant is one. Now let's look at y one comma two, let's say inside the loop I'm basically accessing y one comma two, notice that once again it's a two dimensional array access but none of the dimensions are dependent either on i or on j and so my coefficient matrix is just a zero matrix which has all entries equal to zero, the small f is one comma two which represents the constant access one comma two. Okay finally let's take a last example z one comma i comma two into i plus j, notice that my iteration space is only two dimensional but in this case my array access is three dimensional and it's perfectly okay for that to be, the array access dimension could be either less than the dimensionality could be either less than the iteration space dimensionality or more, we have seen examples of both types, in this case the first dimension is basically independent of i and j and so the coefficient matrix of i and j is zero, the row of the coefficient matrix in this case is zero, for the second dimension it is i, so one comma zero because the coefficient of i is one, coefficient of j is zero and for two into i plus j it becomes two comma one because coefficient of i is two and coefficient of j is one and the additive constants are just one zero zero because the only additive constant is appearing in the first dimension and all the other dimensions have no additive constants in their affine expressions. Okay so notice that we are using multi-dimensional representations of multi-dimensional array accesses and if I was not using multi-dimensional representations using a linearized form of multi-dimensional arrays example by linearizing them in row major form then they may become non-affine for example if I have x of i comma j and if one dimension of x was of size n where n may be a loop invariant then what I get is x of linearized representation would be i into n plus j but now i into n plus j is not affine whereas i comma j is affine so linearized versions may not be affine and that is the reason we want to keep multi-dimensional array accesses we want to preserve the dimensionality of multi-dimensional array accesses because it preserves the higher level structure it preserves the affineness of each expression as opposed to the linearized version where the affineness may be lost and so for our polyhedral analysis we prefer the non-linearized affine representation which means the multi-dimensional representation for array accesses if the array is multi-dimensional and this is basically so that we can have as many affine expressions as possible or as many affine accesses recognize as many affine accesses as possible why do we want to restrict ourselves to affine accesses because a they are common in many types of applications such as image processing vision neural networks and so on and b they become easier to analyze and optimize because affine array accesses lend themselves a very nice structure when we are reasoning about their data dependencies their reuse characteristics and so on as we're going to see in the future modules
