Title: Compiler Design Module 164 : Pipeline Code Generation
Video ID: phZLtg_N1vw
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

For pipelining for fully permutable loops, we basically have seen how if the outermost two loops are fully permutable, then we can use the inner loop as the tasks, as the stages and the outer loop as a task, and we can now pipeline it with order and synchronization. In general, a loop with k outermost fully permutable loops, so if there are k outermost fully permutable loops, in the example that we have seen so far, k was two, then it can be structured as a pipeline with order k minus one dimensions with order and synchronization. So one of the dimensions is used for synchronization and the other order k minus one dimensions can be used for the pipelining and can be used as the tasks that are basically getting pipelined. And so for the SOAR example, k was equal to two. Here, I want to point out that k is basically the number of fully permutable outermost loops and n is the iterations of a single loop. In fact, it is the iterations of the loop on which we are basically doing the pipeline. In other words, it's the number of stages. In our two-dimensional loop, it's the number of iterations of the inner loop. Okay. So the other thing we kind of discussed in our last module is that ignoring boundary conditions, a processor p can execute iteration i or stage i of any task only after processor p minus one has executed iteration i minus one of the same task. So if there is one task, which is let's say in the row, in the diagrams that we have been drawing, then i-th iteration of that particular task can only execute after the i minus one iteration of that task is executed. The i-th iteration executes on processor p, the i minus one iteration executes on processor p minus one, and so there needs to be some synchronization. And processor p must wait for p minus one to finish i minus one and then say, I'm done, only then p should start with iteration i. And to do the synchronization, we are going to use condition variables and that's what I'm going to discuss in today's module. On every iteration, processor p would execute weight on processor p minus one before executing, before the body and signal p plus one after the body and this is ignoring boundary conditions. So basically any processor for every task is going to wait for processor p minus one to signal and it's going to signal processor p plus one so that if p plus one was waiting, then it can move forward. So let's understand how we are going to generate code. This is our familiar SOR-SOR example. I think you are familiar with this and this is not fully permutable, but we know how to convert this to a fully permutable loop. The idea is we just use a transform of the axis and the inner loop becomes for j equals i, j is less than equal to i plus n, j plus plus and the whole body of the SOR loop. And this is the diagram. Notice that this is a parallelogram instead of a rectangle because of the transformed axis. And in this diagram, I claim that this new loop is basically a fully permutable loop. You can, one way to check that is that all the dependency edges that have been drawn in green in this figure are, you know, have their angles theta with respect to the x-axis between zero and 90 degrees. And so basically, you know, all the points, all the different values of j, which is the x-axis, i is the y-axis, all the different values of j basically form the different stages that can be executed. And all the different values of i basically represent the different tasks. So for example, this is task zero, stage zero, task zero, stage one, task zero, stage two, task zero, stage three. And every CPU is basically specializing on one stage, right? So CPU two is specializing on stage two. So CPU two is going to execute task zero, stage two, then it's going to execute task one, stage two, then it's going to execute task two, stage two, and so on. All right, so that's the idea. And now question is how do I generate the code, right? So this is, we already know that this is fully permutable. That means it's pipeline-able. Question is how to generate the code. And the first thing here is how many CPUs are going to be used to execute this code? How many parallel CPUs are going to be used to execute this code? Why do I say parallel? Well, I want to point out once again that for example, this iteration here that I'm pointing is going to execute in parallel with this iteration, right? So there is still significant, even though there's a lot of dependencies and there's a lot of synchronization. You know, if I draw 135 degree line, for example, all these points can execute in parallel, right? So there's a significant amount of parallelism, even with pipeline. And so the first thing to notice here is that the number of stages, distinct stages across all the different tasks. For a single task, there are only N stages because for any single task, I go from I to I plus N. So for any single task, there are only N stages. But across all the tasks, there are N plus N plus one stages because for the zero task, the task IDs are zero to N. So for a single task, there are N plus one stages. And so for zero task, there are N plus one stages from zero to N plus one, zero to N. Then for task one, the stages are one to N plus one. For task two, the stages are two to N plus two and so on. And so the total number of CPUs that are required is basically the minimum number stage is basically zero and the maximum number stage is basically when I equals N, so that becomes N plus N. And so we go from all the way from zero to N plus N inclusive of both zero and N plus N. So we get number of CPUs is N plus N plus one. And so that's what I do. For my code generation, I basically spawn N plus N plus one threads. And let me label each thread or each process based on the inner loop ID J. So J belongs to either this set of values, this interval of values, zero comma N plus N including zero and including N plus N. So that's N plus N plus one values. And for each CPU, I'm going to basically execute some body of the loop. What is each CPU going to do? It's going to basically execute stage. So CPU number J is going to execute stage number J for all the tasks, right? So for example, it's going to execute stage number J for task zero. Then it's going to execute stage number J for task one and so on. The idea is that it specializes on stage J. And so what are all the tasks we are going to have to execute? Well, recall that the tasks are basically given by the outer loop. So for I equals, I'm not written what the lower bound is and what the upper bound is, but in the original loop, it was zero and M. We, because we already know the value of J, we can restrict this further. We don't need to, and this is our familiar way of kind of tightening the loop bounds and eliminating empty iterations. So how do I eliminate empty iterations? Well, we basically check what are the lower bounds and upper bounds in I. So from the upper outer loop, you already know that I must be greater than equal to zero. So I put it here. And then I should be less than equal to M. So I put it here. The other thing I know from the inner loop is that, because J is iterating from I upwards, so I must be less than equal to J. And similarly, I must be greater than equal to J minus N. And so I get I is less than equal to J because J is iterating from I all the way to I plus N. And I must be greater than equal to J minus N. So notice that these extra constraints I'm getting because I already know the value of J. It's like, you know, it's somewhat similar to saying that I switched the two loops basically. I kind of interchange the two loops. And so when I interchange the loop, I already know J. And based on that, I can tighten my loop bounds for I. So these are my constraints. I should be greater than equal to zero and greater than equal to J minus N. I should be less than equal to M and less than equal to J. And basically that gives me the following loop bounds. I goes from max of zero comma J minus N. So that because both of these are lower bounds to min of J comma M because both J and M are upper bounds. And so these represent for the CPU, basically what they represent is the number of tasks, is a set of tasks or the sequence of tasks that are going to execute for stage J. Notice that for any stage J, it's not that all tasks basically execute stage J because, you know, J goes from zero to M plus N. So for example, the N plus one at stage is not executed by task zero and similarly other things, right? So basically this represents what are the tasks that are going to execute in stage J. And what do I need to do in the body? What do I need to do for every task? I need to wait for the CPU on my left and then execute the CPU, the job that I have to do for that particular point I comma J and then wait and then signal the CPU on the right. So I wait for the signal CPU on the left. So what's the CPU on the left? It's J minus one. So I basically call weight of J minus one, but I don't call weight of J minus one indiscriminately. I basically check whether I'm the boundary node or not. If I'm the left boundary node, then I don't need to wait, right? And so I put an if condition. I haven't specified what that condition is going to look like, but basically, you know, in this if condition, I'm going to check that the CPU is a left boundary node or not. If it is not a left boundary node, only then I should wait for the J minus one processor. Then I execute the body. What is the body? Body is basically this statement of the SOR loop, and so that this is, you know, I'm not written the whole body, but it's XJ minus I plus one equals dot, dot, dot, which is, you know, this divide by three of these three values, sum of these three values. And then I'm done with the body, but then I've executed the I comma J-th point in my iteration space. I want to signal J plus one, but once again, I want to check that I'm not the right boundary node, so rightmost boundary node. If I'm the rightmost boundary node, then I don't need to signal J plus one. I only signal if I am not the rightmost boundary node. So this is it. I mean, we basically, this is the code that I'm going to generate for every CPU J to implement my pipeline schedule. The only thing remaining is how do I check whether I'm the boundary node or not? Well, that is actually pretty easy because if you look at it, if I'm on the CPU J, then I would be a boundary if I basically was equal to I, because for J, the leftmost node, the task which where I'll be the leftmost node would be J equals I. Similarly, the task where I'm the rightmost node would be when J equals I plus N, all right? And so basically, if I want to check that I am not the leftmost node, that means I should check that J is not equal to I. In other words, J should be strictly greater than I. Anyway, we know that J is greater than equal to I. So to check that I'm not the leftmost boundary node, I basically say if J is greater than I, and similarly to check whether J, whether I'm not the rightmost boundary node, I check that J is strictly less than I plus N. When J equals I plus N, then I become the rightmost boundary node, so in which case I don't want to execute signal. So I only execute the signal when I'm not the rightmost boundary node. So that is the code generation strategy for a pipeline schedule for this particular SOAR example. We're going to generalize how to do pipelining in general. I mean, for the SOAR example, we just said that we're going to, we basically check whether, because it's a two-dimensional loop, we basically transform the loops as that theta comes between zero and 90, and so we know that they are fully permutable loops. Once we have the fully permutable loop nest for some number of, K number of outermost loop iterations, then it becomes really easy to do pipelining because what I do is I use the innermost loop of that fully permutable loop nest as my pipeline, as my stages, and then I basically have my code, I figure out what are the loop boundaries for every stage, and then I do my code generation just like I showed in the previous slide. If I compare pipelining with barrier synchronization, which we used for constant synchronization, parallelization algorithms that we discussed earlier, which were based on program-dependence graphs, notice that for program-dependence graphs, things were executing in lockstep. So all the threads basically execute this section of the program, and then they synchronize with a barrier, and then they execute the next section of the program, and then the things are synchronized with a barrier. When you do this kind of barrier synchronization, it has lockstep semantics, and that's a little bit of a problem, especially if some of the CPUs are much slower than the other CPUs, in which case the faster guys have to wait for the slower CPUs. But pipelining has greater asynchrony because it's more like I just keep signaling the next CPU. So for example, if the next CPU is slow, it's lagging behind, no problem. I've already signaled it. When it reaches that point, it's going to be able to pick up my signal and move forward. But that doesn't mean I don't need to wait if there's a CPU that comes after me, then I don't need to wait for that CPU to finish because I only need to wait for the CPUs that are on my left, never wait for the CPUs that are on my right. So one way to kind of organize your schedule is to keep the faster CPUs on the left and the slow CPUs on the right, for example. All right, so, and this kind of pipelining schedule gives you a relaxed wavefront. It's like the first CPU executes, then it basically says, okay, now CPU two can execute, sometimes later CPU two starts executing, and now it says now CPU three can execute, and now sometime later CPU three is executing. And at this time, notice that it's possible that all three of the CPUs are basically busy in parallel, and that's where the parallelism in the pipeline is coming from. But this is also a relaxed wavefront. There's no kind of, I'm just kind of signaling other people, but I don't need to wait for them and I kind of just keep doing my own work and I keep signaling the other person. And so that's basically called a relaxed wavefront where one CPU can be slower and then the other, and yet it need not wait. I shouldn't say none may have to wait, but it may not need to wait, right? So it may not have to wait.
