Title: Compiler Design Module 124 10: Andersen's algorithm for pointer analysis
Video ID: rfl5OqY7IPg
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

We've been looking at pointer analysis or the main point to analysis and in the example that we saw in the last module, we just kind of informally showed how the points to graph gets constructed by using a certain object abstraction. However, we haven't yet described what is an algorithm to construct this points to graph automatically. So the problem is that given an abstraction for memory objects, we want to find an algorithm that constructs a points to graph and we are going to use a dataflow analysis. To do this, it's going to be a forward dataflow analysis where the value of the dataflow analysis is going to be the points to graph, which means it's going to be, you know, if I represent the graph in an adjacency list representation, then it's a map from a value V to a set of values, other program values represented as V to 2 to the power V. For example, a node X may point to an object X may point to an object Y or our object Z. So that would be represented as X may point to Y comma Z. So this, you know, it's a map from one object, one abstract object to a set of abstract objects. The meet operator for this dataflow analysis is going to be union of edges, which means that if, for example, X may point to Y on one of the paths and X may point to Z on another path, then when we meet the two values and we say that X may point either to Y or to Z. The formal way to say that is that the meet operator involves the union of edges. And further, because this is a relatively expensive dataflow analysis, we are going to use a flow insensitive analysis on the SSA representation. As you already know, if you use a flow insensitive analysis on an SSA representation, it is usually as precise as a flow sensitive analysis on a non-SSA representation, but typically much faster. In other words, there's going to be a single global value and we can pick the statements in any order and meet eagerly when we perform our dataflow analysis. That means there's going to be a single points to graph and then whenever we transfer across a statement, we are going to add edges to that single global points to graph and then addition of edges is basically the meet operation pretty much with the existing value. Now, the rest of the discussion is going to be about the transfer function of this dataflow analysis that computes the points to graph. And the general shape of the transfer function is if you have some kind of an assignment statement where they say E1 colon equals E2, then whatever E2 can point to, all the objects that E2 can point to must belong to the points to set of E1. So I mean, because whenever this statement gets executed, then if E2 was pointing to some object, let's say Y, then E1 can now also point to Y. So in other words, the transfer function adds all the objects that E2 may point to to the points to set of E1. And we're going to see this more concretely, but I just wanted to give you a flavor of what a transfer function is going to look like. So this algorithm that tracks the points to graph or through one way to represent the points to graph is through an adjacency list where an object to a set of objects is called Anderson's algorithm based on the person who came up with this algorithm for the first time. And I'm going to describe this algorithm in the context of a programming language which supports these operations. This looks like a C like programming language where you could take the address of a variable. So you can say P colon equals ampersand X. You could assign an expression, say A plus B to a variable. You could assign a star P to an arbitrary expression. You could assign P to the star of an arbitrary expression. In other words, you can dereference the value computed by an arbitrary expression and store it into P. You could allocate memory using the new operator or you could declare a local variable using, for example, int X in C. I'm going to omit the types. So I'm just going to call it var X. Also, I want to point out that when I say star P colon equals E, that includes or subsumes the case where P may be a struct and you say P dot F where you actually assign to a field of the object pointed to by P to some expression Q. So star P colon equals E includes P pointer dot F equals Q. Similarly, P equals star E subsumes P colon equals E pointer dot F. So a dereference of a field is treated as though the entire object has been dereferenced. Further, to simplify my analysis, I'm going to canonicalize these different syntaxes into a common syntax where I'm going to treat a local variable declaration just like a dynamic allocation without any problem. Because we are really not worried about scope and lifetime issues in this analysis. So we can treat a variable declaration just like any other heap allocation. I can say that we can pretend that there is a pointer PX that has been created and the value of which is initialized to the pointer returned by this expression new var where var represents the types. For example, new int. Further, any place where we see ampersand used on this variable X, we just replace it with PX, which represents the address of X in this new representation. And finally, wherever we use X in the program, we just replace it with star PX. In other words, for a variable that is kind of a C-like variable, we pretend that we know its pointer and every time X is accessed, we pretend that that pointer is dereferenced. And whenever an address of that variable is taken, we use the pointer value in its place. So further, when I talk about abstractions, we need to talk about the abstraction of the objects. So whenever I say new X, we have already seen how there could be an unbounded number of objects that can be created at runtime. And so we need an abstraction that ensures that at compile time, I can talk about a finite set of abstract objects. And so we're going to define these abstract objects based on the allocation site abstraction, which means I'm going to look at the new statements and number of new statements in the program, and that's the number of abstract objects, or that's the set of abstract objects that I'm going to consider. In general, Anderson's algorithm is independent of the exact abstraction that is used for creating abstract objects. But I'm going to use this concrete abstraction of allocation sites because the transfer functions are sometimes slightly different, depending on what abstraction I use for the object abstraction. Okay, so I'm going to use this example program to demonstrate how Anderson's algorithm is going to work on it. Recall that we are doing a flow-insensitive analysis. So my program just looks like a bag of statements, unordered statements. And in this program, you can see that there are variable declarations, there are allocations made through the new operator, there's the ampersand operator, and there are expressions of the type, there are assignments of the type star r colon equals s, there are dereferences of the type u colon equals star t, and there are copies like p colon equals q. And the first step here is going to be, as I said before, I'm going to canonicalize the program and convert all the variable declarations to their explicit allocation type forms. So for example, var p becomes a p, where a p represents address of p, colon equals new something. And similarly, var q becomes a q colon equals new something. Further, when I say p colon equals new, it's equivalent to saying star a p colon equals new, because recall that p was a variable. And now I've converted p to a p. So every use of p should be replaced with star a p. And similarly, star a q is new, and so on. r colon equals ampersand p becomes r colon equals a p, and so on. And p colon equals q becomes star a p colon equals star a q. Further, if I see an assignment of the type star e1 colon equals e2, where e1 and e2 are expressions, then I break them down further and define transfer functions for each of those smaller instructions. So for example, star e1 colon equals e2 is basically broken down into v1 colon equals e1. So you first compute the LHS, then you compute the RHS. So v2 colon equals e2. And then finally, you actually do the assignment by doing star v1 colon equals v2. These three instructions represent the original operation. But now, because I've broken down the original operation into three different statements, now I'll define the transfer functions of each of these different instructions, smaller instructions. And that's easier to define, and that's why I break it down. So for example, when I use that, then star a p colon equals new something becomes v1 equals new something. And then star a p colon equals v1 using the breaking down that I described in the previous slide and so on. All right. Now let's get started with that Anderson's algorithm. The first thing I'm going to look at, let's say I look at the first instruction, which says a p colon equals new something. Now, in this case, it's clear that whatever is the abstraction that the object being allocated here using the new operator, let's say it's an allocation site abstraction, then a p can point to that abstract object. For example, in this case, if the p c at which new is happening is 1, then a p can point to an object that has been allocated at allocation site 1. So this is the general rule that we're going to use. I mean, this is the generalization of that rule. So if there is an instruction of the type x colon equals new something at p c l, then l must belong to the points to set of x. Now, I'm going to use this notation where x arrow a represents the fact that a belongs to the points to set of x. Now, this inference rule here says that if x pointed to some abstract object a earlier, after transferring across this statement, x now may point to either a or l. So just add another edge to my points to graph saying that if it was earlier pointing to a, then it can now point to either a or l because of the transfer across this instruction, because this instruction says that x may point to an object that was allocated at location l. This operation where we add an edge and not replace the edge is called a weak update. We add a new value to an existing set in contrast to a strong update which would have overwritten the existing set with a new value. For example, a strong update in this case would have changed x arrow a to x arrow l. But recall that we are doing a flow-insensitive analysis. We are consuming the instructions in any arbitrary order and we are meeting eagerly, which means that in this example, in this case, we cannot be sound if we do strong updates, but we are sound if we do weak updates because we are just conservatively saying that it may point to whatever it was pointing to earlier plus whatever it can point to by virtue of this instruction. More formally, the transfer function across a statement which allocates a variable at allocation site n basically says that that allocation site n must belong to the points to set of p. This is what the formal rule or the more general way of representing what I've shown here. So using the first three instructions, we get the points to graph which says AP can point to one, AQ can point to two, and V1 can point to three. Now we are at this assignment instruction which says star AP colon equals V1 and we need to define a transfer function for this. And we're going to use the same idea. Whatever V1 can point to, now it should become a part of the points to set of whatever star AP can point to. So this is the general form. If I have a statement which looks like star X colon equals Y and if X was originally pointing to let's say some arbitrary abstract objects A and B and A was pointing to D and Y was pointing to C, then whatever X was pointing to, in this case A and B, will can also now point additionally to C. So example, originally A was pointing to D, but now A can point through C because Y was pointing to C by virtue of this statement. Now A can also point to C. Similarly, B, if it was not pointing to anything earlier, now it can potentially point to C. So this is the general rule that for an assignment statement, for an assignment operation of the form star P colon equals Q, it must be true that everything that is in the points to set of Q must be present in the points to set of star P, written using the superset operator on the right hand side. So using the assign rule, we basically change the points to set from what we saw earlier to this one, where we say that because star P colon equals V1, and V1 was pointing to 3, then whatever AP was pointing to, which is 1, can now point to whatever V1 was pointing to. So I will draw an edge from 1 to 3 by virtue of this statement star AP colon equals V1. Now for V2 colon equals new, we just create another edge using our allocation site. V2 can now point to an object point allocated at location 5. Star AQ colon equals V2, we use our assign rule to basically say that whatever AQ can point to, which was 2, will can point to whatever V2 can point to, which was 5. So we draw an edge from 2 to 5 in the points to graph. Then we have this statement called R colon equals AP. And once again, we need to define a transfer function for something like this. And we're going to use the same idea that whatever AP can point to that all those things, all those objects should be a part of whatever R should point to. This is again a weak update. And this is the general rule, which is called the copy rule. So it says that if you say X colon equals Y, then whatever Y can point to, X can also point to. For example, if originally X was pointing to A and Y was pointing to B, then after transfer X may point to either A or B. And I guess I should also for completeness say Y may still point to only B. The more general form or the more formal form of this rule or the transfer function is that for a copy statement of the form P colon equals Q, the transfer function should ensure that anything that Q may point to is also a part of whatever P may point to. In other words, the points to set of P must be a superset of the points to set of Q. All right. Now we're going to look at this instruction S colon equals new. And we're just going to use our allocation side abstraction. So before that, when I say R colon equals AP, it basically ensures that whatever AP could point to, which was one, R can also point to that. And that this is what our new points to graph looks like. Statement A is pretty simple. We just add another edge from S to eight because of statement eight. Star R colon equals S is just our assigned operator, which means that whatever R can point to, which in this case is one, should, may point, may start now pointing to whatever S can point to. In other words, one should now be able to point to eight. And that's what our new points to graph looks like. We draw, we add a new edge from one to eight in this points to graph by virtue of this instruction star R colon equals S. Use T colon equals AQ basically causes this edge to be added because T can point to whatever AQ can point to. So T can now point to two. U colon equals star T. Now this is a dereference of whatever T can point to. And in this case, whatever star T can point to, so T can point to two, but star T, which is represented by whatever two can point to, in this case is five. So you can point to whatever star T can point to and thus you can point to five. More generally, if I have a dereference of the form X colon equals star Y. And if X was pointing to, let's say, A and Y was pointing to, let's say, a couple of abstract objects, B and C. And in turn, because I'm going to dereference Y, I need to know what can B point to. Let's say B points could point to D and C could point to E. Then X can now point to whatever B and C may point to. So X can point to D or E or whatever it was pointing to earlier. So X can now point to either A or D or E. More generally, for a dereference statement of the form P colon equals star Q, whatever star Q may point to is now something that P may point to. In other words, the points to set of P is a superset of whatever the points to set of star Q. In our example, that means that U can point to whatever star T can point to. In other words, U can point to whatever two can point to. In other words, you can point to five. And that's the new edge that we create in our points to graph by virtue of statement U colon equals star T. Again, V3 colon equals star Q. We use our assignment rule and say whatever star A Q can points to, V3 can point to. So A star A Q can point to five. So V3 can now point to five. And finally, star AP colon equals V3. For the statement 12, actually we use the dereference rule. And for statement 13, we use the assignment rule, which means that whatever AP can point to, which is one, can now point to whatever V3 can point to, which is five. And so we draw this edge from one to five. And we need to keep repeating this procedure for all these statements in arbitrary order, our flow insensitive data flow analysis, until we reach a fixed point, which means we don't add any more edges. And in fact, you can check for yourself that this graph, this points to graph that I've drawn here is a fixed point solution using Anderson's algorithm, which is a forward data flow analysis using the rules that we have discussed, the transport for transfer function and the union of edges as the meet object.
