Title: Compiler Design Module 35 : Semantic Analysis as Recursive Descent over AST
Video ID: PNS7nxSi608
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

So now that we are introduced to the idea of scope and scoping rules, let's understand how something like that may be implemented. And typically, any semantic analysis, including scoping, is implemented as a recursive descent of the AST. So what is a recursive descent? Well, it's just think of it as an in-order or a pre-order or a post-order traversal where basically we look at any node and then we look at all its children and then on its way back, we again look at that node, all right? So basically, the first step, that's before, we basically process the AST node N for any node N. Then we recurse, which is we process the children of N. Typically, we would like to process the children of N in some order, potentially, depending on the semantics of N. And so, for example, we may want to process C1, C2, C i from left to right, for example, from the first to the last child of N, if the order is important. And when I'm done processing the children of N recursively, I come back and that's the third step, which is finish processing the AST node N. So any post-processing that needs to be done is done. So this is a typical structure of any semantic analysis. As you are descending down the tree, you are basically building the context. And then as you are, or even if you are going from left to right, you may be building the context. And then as you are retreating, you are removing that context and then doing some other part of some parent part of the tree or something like that. So let's look at a concrete example. So we're going to look at scoping as recursive descent of the abstract syntax tree. So here is an example. Let's say this particular program has a new scope. Why is this new scope created? It could just be created using curly braces, or it could be created because it's a new function definition, or it could be created because it's a for loop with a body that involves curly braces. There are multiple reasons why there could be a new scope. And inside a new scope, I could declare a variable. For example, I would say int x equals four, and then I could use that variable. For example, I could call some function f on this variable x. Now, in some languages, it should be true that the declarations are appearing at the very top. And once the body starts, the declarations are not allowed. After that, in some other languages, the declarations can be interspersed with the body. In fact, early versions of C actually had this restriction that declarations can only be at the top of any scope, any new scope. And the body, which is the statements of the scope, should be after all the declarations. Once the body has started, no more declarations can be done. That was the old flavors of C, although the new flavors of C actually allow you to intersperse declarations and statements. So if I look at the AST of this program fragment, it may look something like the following. Maybe there will be a node which says it's a new scope. And then it would have a left node, which would be the list of declarations. Here I'm assuming the old style of C, which is that all the declarations are at the very top. So that would be a list of declarations, D1, dot, dot, dot, let's say there were 10 declarations, I'm assuming D1, dot, dot, dot, D10 in order, that order is also important because maybe the second declaration is referring to the first declaration or something like that. And so this is a list of declarations. And then after that, there is a list of statements and all the declarations are on the top and all the statements are after that in this particular model. So I'm assuming that there are, let's say, 100 statements. So there are S1, dot, dot, S100, which are all the statements. And once again, the order is also important here. The first statement is S1 and second is S2. And that's the order in which the program intends them to execute. It shouldn't so happen that you can reorder these statements or anything like that. So if I want to do scoping, I'm going to first descend down the scope and then I'm going to look at the list of declarations that is going to help me build the context. So, for example, I'm going to create mappings, learn mappings that maybe X now is pointing to an object that is of type integer or something like that. And then I'm going to look at the statements. And then while I'm looking at the statements, I can, if the statements ever use X, for example, they're calling FX or something like that, then I know what X is referring to. X is referring to whatever has been declared in these declarations, if it has been declared. If it has not been declared in the declarations, then I want to go to the upper scope and maybe look at X in the outside scope, the scope that just encapsulates this particular new scope that I created. And I want to keep doing that. And that would be the idea. We're going to see that in a little bit more detail very soon. Also, in this previous example, I assume that all the declarations are on the top and all the statements are after that. But let's say there was a recent version of C which allows declarations and statements to be interspersed. How would something like that be handled? Well, that's also easy. You just need to define a new construct. For example, C defines block items. And a block item could either be a statement or a declaration. And then it just says, these are all the block items. So maybe the block items are the 110 block items and maybe the 10 of them are declarations and 100 are statements. And then you say block item one, block item two, block item three, and so on. And now, as the recursive descent proceeds, it's going to look at B1, B2, and so on. And as it encounters declarations, some of these block items will be declarations. So as it encounters declarations, it's going to keep building the context and the uses will be resolved according to the current context. So for example, if B2 contains a declaration and B3 contains a use of x, so let's say B2 contains a declaration of x and B3 contains a use of x, then we know that the use at B3 is basically referring to the declaration at B2. Now, notice that although I call it a recursive descent of AST, and I basically kind of sort of imply that the context is being built from the top to bottom, it's actually also true that the context is being built from left to right, as seen in this example. The important thing is the scope node here. So languages like C, for example, basically use the curly braces to indicate scope boundaries. And every time it uses a curly brace, a new scope is created. And that scope lives across all these statements and declarations, but it is destroyed only when you exit the scope. So for example, anything above or anything which is a sibling of this particular scope. So for example, if I have code which looks like this, let's say I have A equals 10, and I declare int A, and then I basically have another scope. And here I say A equals 20. Then this A cannot refer to this A, right? Although you may say, oh, but this is just left to right traversal. And the first traversal of the scope is going to build the context, and we're going to, because of the declaration A, it's going to put a mapping for A. And then you can say, and the second scope appears on the right of A. But the scope node is special in this particular case. And so every time you exit a scope, or on the way back, on the third step, when you are post-processing the scope node, then you basically, at that time, you basically forget everything that was declared in that particular scope, right? So for example, when I'm going to descend into the scope, I'm going to see int A, and it's going to be live for the entire duration of that scope. But when I'm going to go out of this particular scope, I'm going to forget A, all right? And after I go out of the scope, then I'm going to get into the scope. But by this time, I've already forgotten A, because I've come out of the scope. On the other hand, if there were no curly braces, then I wouldn't have gone out of the scope, and then I would have still had a mapping for A, all right? So to summarize, scope nodes are special, in the sense that when you're coming up, when you're going back, in the third step of the AST recursion, then you are also destroying the context that was created below that particular node. Okay, so how do we maintain this context? I've been using this term a little bit abstractly, but basically we use a data structure called a symbol table to maintain this context. What is this data structure? Well, it just maintains a mapping for identifiers to things, right? So for example, it could create mappings from identifiers to objects or types or other things. And on entering the new scope, the symbol table is copied, all right? So whenever we enter a new scope, we basically make a copy of the symbol table, and we save the old version of the symbol table. So on entering a new scope, the symbol table is copied, and the old version is saved, okay? This is so that when we get out of the scope, so when we exit the scope, we are able to restore the old version. Within a scope on encountering a declaration, we basically add that particular mapping that is implied by that declaration to the symbol table, all right? So we're going to add mappings to the symbol table on encountering a declaration within a scope. Even the top level, I'm considering it as a scope, right? So the top level scope is basically the scope of global variables and global functions. It's not really demarcated by curly braces, but we start with scope number zero, and then we can have more scopes. And so even if I encounter a global declaration, we're just adding it to the symbol table of the global scope, all right? And on exiting the scope, we just restore the saved copy. So when we restore the saved copy, any modifications that we made to the new copy that we had created during the entry of the scope are discarded. And so any new declarations that were encountered within that scope are not meaningful outside of that scope, all right? So here are some helper functions that can help us to implement a symbol table. Basically, the most important thing is that we can just use a stack of scopes. This is basically what the abstraction of scopes actually offers you nesting. And so to be able to capture nesting, the best data structure is perhaps a stack. And so we're going to have a stack of scopes. Every time we enter a scope, we start a new nested scope and push it to the top of the stack. If we encounter a use of a symbol x, of an identifier x, we call this function find symbol. And what this function does, it searches the stack starting from the top for the first scope that contains x. So we are basically looking for the closest, more nested scope that contains a declaration of x. So we're going to start at the top of the stack and we're going to go back till the bottom of the stack, which is with the top of the stack. Which is with the top level scope and to see which is the x that this x is referring to. If it finds something, then that is what is meant by it and that information is recorded. So we've just, for example, we can store a pointer to the declaration where that x was closest declaration of x, closest nested declaration of x. That would be the meaning of this particular identifier x. If the identifier is not found in any of the enclosing scopes, then we can just return null and this would probably indicate an error, a scope error in your program. And we'll talk about error handling later. Well, another helper function is add symbol. And this just adds to the current scope. And recall that the current scope is basically at the top of the stack. So it adds to the top level scope in the stack. Now this is, add symbol is going to be called whenever we encounter a new declaration. So every time we encounter a new declaration, we just add, we call add symbol that adds this particular mapping to the top of the stack. The scope at the top of the stack. There's another helper function called check scope x. This returns true if and only if x is defined in the current top scope. So unlike find symbol, check scope is just checking whether x is defined in the current scope or not. It doesn't actually look at all the enclosing scopes of the current scope or the top level scope. What's the use of something like this? Well, this is often used for, for example, figuring out or ruling out double defined error. So if you have two defines with the same identifier, you want to rule them out. So the second time you get a declaration, let's say int x, then you can check whether x is already defined in the current scope or not. This would be an error only if x was defined in the current scope. If x is defined in an enclosing scope, that's legal, but if x cannot be defined twice in the same scope and to do that, check scope can help. All right, finally, there's this helper function called exit scope, which just exits the current scope, which basically means you just pop off the top of the stack and you're left with whatever is remaining on the stack. So you just popped off the top entry of the stack, which was basically populated by you called enter scope during the traversal of the AST, recursive descent traversal of the AST. Okay, so, so far we have, you know, we have discussed a method to basically be able to identify or identify things or objects for identifiers using a single recursive descent traversal of the AST. But let's say I wanted to support use before define. We took some examples like C++ or Perl where it's possible to actually use some identifiers before they are defined and maybe they can be defined later. And the strategy that I just explained to dissolve scoping will fail in that particular case because if I go, you know, if I traverse recursively from top to bottom the AST and then left to right, then I'm not going to, if the use is happening before the define, then in this particular case I won't be able to resolve the use because I haven't yet seen the define. The define is going to be seen later in this particular order of traversal. So how do you deal with something like this? Well, the simple solution is to use multiple AST passes. So the first pass can just collect all the declarations in any scope. So for example, it can just descend and just keep collecting all the declarations and then on the way back it can just add those declarations to each particular scope node. So it's to say that, okay, these are all the declarations in your scope. And in the second pass you can resolve using the symbol table as we were doing earlier. So in the second pass we can use the information that was created in the first pass to know what are all the declarations in every scope. And then based on that we can resolve all the uses of variables using a symbol table just like you were doing earlier. In general, it is usually easier to break an analysis into multiple AST passes. So it's perfectly okay to basically traverse the AST top to bottom multiple times. Each traversal is typically linear time. So it's not going to really add too much to your cost and it makes the logic much simpler. We just saw an example as opposed to, and the other option is to have one big complicated path that just tries to do everything in a single pass. It's possible but it's usually much more complex. It's usually easier to break an analysis into multiple AST passes and that's how it's typically done for the semantic analysis phase.
