Title: Compiler Design Module 174 : Freeze Opcode in LLVM
Video ID: AReq0cHU7Kc
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

we are familiar with both the undeaf value and the poison value and why those semantics have been chosen etc. But now let's look at some limitations of undeaf and poison, some of which we are already familiar with, but let's revisit them. The first limitation is that both undeaf and poison trigger UB with the branch. So if I use if A, and if A was an undeaf value or a poison value, then this basically means that the program exhibits UB. And this basically means that I cannot hoist any branches. So for example, I cannot convert if A and then followed by another if, so there's a nested if, I cannot invert the two ifs because if B was an undeaf value and A was false, then the first program is well behaved, but the second program is going to trigger UB. Similarly, I mean, I can replace if with while and the same thing, I can't implement, for example, loop unswitching. And this is a common example that we've used to basically motivate that why we need to be able to hoist branches because loop unswitching involves the hoisting of a branch condition. The if condition out inside the loop needs to be brought outside the loop and such hoisting is not acceptable if you have undeaf and poison values and the condition of the branch could potentially be either of these, either undeaf or poison. Okay, so here's another one. So we got introduced to this LLVM opcode called select, which is like the ternary operator in C, depending on the C language, depending on the condition C, this returns either X or Y. And it's not okay in the presence of undeaf and poison to basically convert this into an if-then-is because the select operation basically behaves differently for undeaf and poison versus what the if condition is. For example, select on an undeaf value can give either of the two values X and Y non-deterministically. So select on an undeaf value basically returns another undeaf value because it could be either of the two, whereas a branch on an undeaf value is just undefined behavior. And so this transformation becomes illegal. Here is another example. This is something that we have not, this is an example that we have not seen before, but it's in a similar spirit. The problem here that is exposed is that undeaf may return a different value on each observation. So let's say my code is basically A equals X divided by Y and then B equals X mod Y, and a common transformation that you would expect is that you can get rid of the second mod operation and instead strength reduce it using a subtraction operation. So it can be X minus A star Y because you already know what is the quotient. So using the quotient, you can identify the remainder. However, this is not a valid transformation. Consider the case in the presence of undeaf or poison because consider the case when X equals undeaf and Y equals one. If X equals undeaf and Y equals one, then undeaf divided by one is just undeaf. But undeaf mod one is going to give you zero because anything mod one is going to give you zero and undeaf is just a non-deterministic value pulled out of the type of X and whatever value I put out here, mod one is just going to give me zero. And so the answer here is zero. Whereas on the right-hand side, if I look at X minus A star Y, I basically get X is undeaf and A is also undeaf. So X minus undeaf star Y. And so undeaf star Y is also kind of partially undeaf or fully undeaf. And so undeaf minus undeaf will also potentially give me a partially undeaf or a fully undeaf value. So on the source, I have a deterministic value zero. On the target, I have a non-deterministic value, which is either undeaf or partially undeaf. But I should actually say this could be partially undeaf as well. All right. So we have already looked at all these kind of examples, most of these at least. And what is the solution? Because these transformations look like very common transformations and it seems like a pity if we cannot support such transformations at the intermediate representation level because that basically would really handicap us. So one solution that was proposed and has now been incorporated into LLVM is the freeze instruction, which is basically saying that you can say X equals freeze I8Y. So what does any other type, I'm using I8 as a canonical type, but you can use any other type and say freeze the value. What does it mean? Well, it means that if Y was already well-defined, then X is just equal to Y. It's no difference from just copying Y into X. But if Y was a non-deterministic value, for example, if it was either poison or undeaf, then you convert it into a well-defined value. And so basically you convert it into some well-defined value, which can be randomly chosen by you, all right, by the program at the time of executing. So if you execute this instruction, if Y turned out to be undeaf, then you can just choose random value. But now from here on X is a well-defined value, whatever value you chose. Similarly, if Y turned out to be poison, you can again choose some random value and put that into X. And the good thing here is that the value that you choose is of your own choice, I mean, of the machine's choice. But whatever value it is, it is going to be a constant value. It's not going to have the behavior of the undeaf value, for example, where each time it is observed, it can give you a different answer, right? Here, once you have given it, it has now become a well-defined deterministic value. So, which means X is now both poison free and undeaf free. We have picked an arbitrary well-defined value of the given type, but it's very different from an undeaf value. With undeaf value, recall, basically it could give you different answers on different observations. But here X is going to give you the same answer on different observations because it is a well-defined value, just like any other well-defined value in your program. So, for example, now it is legal to have this transformation. So, I'm showing the loop un-switching example, which is a canonical example of hoisting of a control flow branch of instruction. So, in this case, it was not okay to do this, but now I have added a freeze instruction here to be. And now this transformation becomes legal. Why does it become legal? Well, even if B was undeaf and A was false, then basically what happens is that in this case, I'm basically doing a freeze of B. So, freeze of B is already kind of a well-defined value and a branch on a well-defined value is not UB. Depending on the value, it can either take this branch or that branch. And now, consider the problematic case that we have been discussing all through, which is A equals false and B equals undeaf. Now, what happens is, or poison, then what happens is freeze B, this could be either undeaf or poison, should clarify. So, freeze B is going to give me some deterministic value, some well-defined value. So, let's say that value is, let's say C. So, now if that value that was chosen by the machine was false, then I'm going to come here and then I'm going to say while A and that's A recall is false. So, I'm not going to enter the loop and it's all okay. Similarly, if C was true, once again, I'm going to come to this loop and while A, once again A is false and so nothing happens. So, both these original program and the target program, the source program and the target program have the same behavior for this case when A equals false and B is a non-deterministic value, which is either undeaf or poison. Both these programs basically behave as no-ops, they don't really do anything. And so, for this problematic case also, these two programs are equal. For all the non-problematic case also, let's say if B was a well-defined value, then if freeze B just is the same value that comes back and now, I mean, you can show that for well-defined values, this transformation is equal, it's fine and that's what we talk about when we talk about the loop unswitching transformation in any case. The only problem case was these kind of non-deterministic values, which we have been able to handle using the freeze opcode. So, freeze looks good so far. Here's another example. So, let's say I have Z equals select C, X, Y. Now, I can just use if freeze C, Z equals X, else Z equals Y. Recall that without freeze, this was not a valid transformation, but with freeze, this becomes a valid transformation because you can show that for all possible inputs C, X and Y, they could potentially even be undefined poison, these two programs are going to yield the same observable behavior. In other words, they're going to set the Z to the same value. Okay. So, I mean, we have basically now been exposed to four different types of non-determinism in IR like LLVM. The first non-determinism we call undefined behavior, which just basically says that if this happens, then the program can do anything. In other words, this should never happen. And so, that's called undefined behavior or UB. The second non-determinism that we saw was poison value, which basically say, oh, it's an error value that was generated. The program is okay, but just that some values are error values or poison value and the poison value propagates and things like that. The third value that we discussed was an undef value. Undef value was a non-deterministic value for a given type and on every observation, it could return a different, you know, different concrete value. And finally, there was a frozen value, which is actually a well-defined value, just that it was frozen at the time of freeze instruction. And at the time of freezing, you can, you know, the abstract machine can basically pick any random value. But after that, it's kind of frozen and it just kind of remains like that. And it picks up an abstract value only in the case when the input value was either undef or poison. If the input value is already a well-defined value, then freeze does nothing. It just returns the same value back. And it's clear that, you know, basically I'm going from more non-determinism to less non-determinism. So this is, you know, this is more non-determinism, more ND to less ND. And that also means that if, you know, these values or these behaviors were on the LHS of or the source side of a transformation, then that gives me more optimization opportunities. So for example, you know, if there were cases of UB in the source side, then I can just kind of remove the whole code. Or if there were cases of poison value, that gives me more flexibility than if it was an undig value. And that in turn gives me more flexibility if it was a frozen value. So in general, if, you know, if I have more non-determinism on the source side or on the LHS, as I call it, then it's a good thing from optimization perspective. On the other hand, if the same values are generated on the RHS or on the target side, then it gives me less flexibility in terms of optimization from, you know, because basically on the target side, I have some non-determinism. I have to make sure that that non-determinism was also present originally in the source side. I cannot just introduce extra non-determinism on the target side. And so that gives me less flexibility when generated on the RHS. And so, so basically that's why we need to have a spectrum. I mean, you can't just go all the way to the left or all the way to the right as we kind of originally also motivated the need for such, such kind of semantics is basically because the IR designer needs to walk this tight line between the amount of non-determinism in the source and the amount of non-determinism in the target. And so, you know, this is what people have come up with so far in an IR like LLVM. They have all four types, UB, Poison, Undef and Freeze or frozen values. So the freeze opcode is a good thing on the target side. The freeze opcode, you know, is by far the least non-deterministic of all the four options. So it's great on the target side because it will enable more optimizations, but it will be bad on the source side, right? So when, if there's a transformation from source to target, then you would ideally like that, you know, you generate freeze on the right, you know, if freeze was being generated on the target side, you know, that makes, that makes, you know, it easier to kind of say that this transformation is legal. On the other hand, if it's on the source side, then actually disable some optimizations. In some, in all the examples that we've seen so far where freeze was used, the freeze opcode was being generated on the target side and that was actually enabling those transformations. And that was basically the reason, the whole motivation of introducing the freeze opcode because for example, we freeze the value before using it as an opcode for the branch instruction or things like, or the operand to the branch instruction and things like that. But the question of course is, you know, okay, freeze is great if it is used on the target side, but you know, of course there must be a flip side. What if freeze is used on the source side or freeze is present in the source side? What kind of transformations does it thwart? After all, there must be a reason that we don't use freeze all the time. All right, so let's look at some examples that we have looked at across the previous few modules to see, you know, which of these are getting, going to get thwarted and which of these are still going to remain valid. One of the examples that we used was this undefined behavior, you know, in a language like C for sign integer overflow. So if you have N, which is an integer and you do N plus one, of course, you know, you may be initializing N before you kind of do N plus one. And if N was equal to int max, then N plus one would basically overflow. And the question is what should happen in that case? And we said, oh, you know, if you consider that to be undefined behavior, then, you know, that then this transformation is legal. You can go from i is less than N plus one to i is less than equal to N. If you consider that to be poison, even then this transformation is legal because, you know, basically you're trying to branch on a poison value. If that happens, then you don't need to consider that case because that would again be undefined behavior. So for N equals int max, i is less than N plus one values to poison in LLVM. And so this transformation is actually legal. Now the question is what if, you know, what if I instead of doing i less than N plus one and actually freeze the value before I actually, you know, do the transformation? In other words, you know, what if I just kind of start eagerly freezing my value because after all freezes seems like pretty innocuous in the sense that, you know, if it was already a well-defined value, it's actually not changed anything. And if it was an undefined value, it just, you know, removes all the non-determinism. So in this case, I'm just kind of trying to freeze, let's say i is less than N plus one. And so what should happen, right? And so the question is firstly, this transformation is legal because I'm going from more non-determinism to less non-determinism. You know, when N plus one was all good and N plus one was a well-defined value, then, you know, nothing has changed. And if N plus one or if i is less than N plus one was a poison value or an undef value, then freeze is just, you know, determinizing it even more and you can always go from more non-determinism to less non-determinism. And so the behaviors of the second program are a subset of the behavior of the first program and so this transformation is legal. But the question we want to ask is, is it okay to go from this to this? All right. And so basically the question we want to ask is, can I go from freeze of i is less than N plus one to i is less than equal to N? And, you know, let's consider the case, the problematic case, which is when N equals int max, then N plus one will become poison. And so i is less than N plus one would also become poison. And now I'm freezing that value. So I'll get some values of, you know, because this is a Boolean type, so I'll either get true or I'll get false. And so depending, you know, depending on what I choose, I could either enter the loop on the first iteration or I could not enter the loop, right? There both options are open depending on what was the value that was returned by the machine. On the other hand, if I look at the target program, you know, for N equals int max, i is less than equal to N would be always true because everything is, you know, for all values which are integer type will be less than equal to int max. And so I will always enter the loop or even in the first iteration, I will enter the loop. Whereas in the first iteration, the first program may or may not enter the loop depending on what is the value returned by But the good thing here is that freeze is not completely deterministic, right? I mean, it's the abstract machine that can choose the value of freeze. And in this case, the compiler can, you know, basically assume that the value that has been chosen suits the optimization that it wants. And so what it can do is it can choose the frozen value for poison to be true each time. So if it sees a poison value here, it will basically choose true every time, right? Because after the freeze can choose any arbitrary value and that arbitrary value can be chosen by the runtime or by the compiler to suit its optimization goals, for example. And in this case, you can, you know, the compiler may choose to say that, oh, frozen value for poison should always be true for each time. Notice that this is going to be computed for each iteration of the loop. So if there were, you know, X iterations of the loop, this is going to get computed X times. And if I basically say, oh, each time it gets computed, I'm just going to basically return the true value for this arbitrary value that I need to choose. Then these two programs are actually equivalent because both of them are going to enter the loop and actually going to go into an infinite loop for the case when n equals int max. For the case when n is not equal to int max, you know, the loops behave as I expected. So that's not the interesting case for us. But on the other hand, notice that if I had basically changed this freeze i n plus one to, let's say, if i is less than freeze of n plus one, then that would have been a problem. And then it wouldn't have not been okay, not okay to do this transformation. All right. So this transformation would have been wrong. Okay. So this transformation would have been wrong because in this case, you know, I basically need to choose a value for n plus one in case of it was poison. And then it should be such a value then that for all possible i's, it always returns true. But, you know, I can't really find such a value because after all at some point i is going to become int max. And so whatever value I choose on the right hand side, you know, I'm not going to get int max less than that value. At best I could have chosen int max, but int max is not strictly less than int max. So it's going to return false. And so I won't be able to choose in that case, you know, a value which is always going to convert the condition to true. Right. So basically the point is that, you know, if I freeze the Boolean condition, then this transformation is okay. But if I was even more eager and I was kind of freezing the RHS of this relational operator less than, then this transformation becomes invalid. And so freeze is, you know, so this is where we basically see a case where freeze actually thwarts optimization. Right. I showed you a case where freeze didn't really make a difference, which was when I was froze the entire condition. But now here's a case when freeze makes a difference or it thwarts optimizations when I froze the RHS of the relational operator and then this transformation becomes illegal. Here's another example. So let's say I have A equals undef and say AF equals freeze A, and then B equals two into A and C equals A and three. This is an example that we've been using previously as well. And let's say A was undef, but now this time the only change I've made from the previous discussion is I've frozen the value of A. And earlier I was saying, oh, if you ever see B equals mul I 32 A comma two, and you can say that A is undef, you can always convert it into B equals two. And similarly you can convert this into C equals three. But now these transformations are not okay because you have chosen a single value of A and you know, let's say the value you chose was for A was two, then or let's say the value you chose for AF was one, then I should say this is AF. So then one into two is two, but then one into three, one and three is not three, that gives me one. And so so there exists no single value of AF that basically makes this transformation possible. And so this is an illegal transformation now. On the other hand, this may not be such a big deal because if the compiler can do more reasoning, then what it can figure out is let's choose a value for AF such that, you know, I can basically simplify both the instructions. For example, I can convert B equals this multiplication expression into B equals two and then AND of A comma three to C equals one. So I just chose a value. For example, I could choose a value AF equals one. So in this case, I'm choosing the value of AF equals one and that is going to give me this answer and this is a legal transformation. So freeze is still retaining some amount of non-determinism and that's allowing us to do transformations that would have been not possible if, for example, instead of saying AF equals freeze A, which to choose an arbitrary value, I have restricted to choose one particular value, let's say zero or some other value or something like that. So a good thing is that there's still some amount of non-determinism left and that allows the compiler to make these kinds of transformations. The bad news is the compiler now needs to work harder to identify such transformations. Here is another example. So, you know, we talked about how when we do common sub-expression elimination or global value numbering and an incarnation of that little algorithm, then if you do IF X equals V FX, can you convert it to IF X equals V F V? And the answer is, you know, when V was an undef value, then this is not a legal transformation. This is something we have discussed earlier, but the good thing is if you have frozen the value, so if you frozen the undef value, so that means V was undef free and poison free, then this becomes a legal transformation. Here is another example. So, let's say X equals C question mark U colon V. So, by this ternary operator, I'm representing the select operation. Similarly, A equals C2 question mark U colon B. Is it okay to convert it to X equals Y and A equals B, where U is basically the undef value. So, I should basically say undef colon Y and undef colon B. And the answer is yes, it's okay. So, this is okay. But now, if I basically change U to freeze of U, which means V is going to get some deterministic value, then it is no longer okay to do these transformations because in the first instruction, I'm expecting V to be equal to Y and in the second transformation, I'm expecting V to be equal to B and Y may not be equal to B and so it's not okay to do this transformation anymore. So, here's another example where freeze on the LHS is actually causing some transformations to get thwarted. The first example that we saw was this example where I say m equals n plus 1 and say if m2 equals freeze of m and then I say if i is less than m2, then do something. I cannot change this to if i is less than equal to n and so this is no longer true because consider the case when n was int max, then this becomes a problem. So, here's another example where the freeze of code if used in the wrong place can actually thwart a transformation. So, as with all the other examples that we have used, if we have a non-deterministic value which is on the LHS, the more non-determinism is good on the LHS, less non-determinism is good on the RHS and so compiler needs to walk this tight line between how much non-determinism to produce because if you produce more non-determinism than required, then maybe the current transformation is not going to be valid. If you produce less non-determinism or you kind of make things more deterministic, then maybe you're going to thwart future transformations.
