Title: Compiler Design Module 104 : MFP, MOP, and IDEAL Solutions
Video ID: bmaHXgbPty4
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

So to review, we looked at the maximum fixed point solution with respect to the ideal solution and the meet over path solution. MFP versus MOP versus ideal. Ideal is when you meet over executable paths, MOP is when you meet over all paths and you meet at the very end. Similarly for ideal, you meet at the very end and so if I look at what is MOP of some input x, then that is ideal of x met with transfer function fp applied to x for all paths p, so for all unexecuted paths p. So ideal x contains all the executed paths and MOP also contains all the unexecuted paths. So if I meet the ideal solution with the solution that is obtained by meeting all the transfer functions across all the unexecuted paths, I am going to get my MOP solution. And so it is clear from this equation itself that MOP must be less than equal to ideal because MOP is ideal meet with something and so a meet b is always less than equal to a and b. That's just by the definition of the meet operator and so from this we can infer that MOP of x for any x is always less than equal to ideal of x. And here is a short way of writing that you just were to say MOP is less than equal to ideal. So that's the relation between the MOP solution and the ideal solution. Now the next thing you want to talk about is how does MFP compare to both these two. So recall that MFP involves meeting at intermediate points. So both MOP and ideal meet at the very end, whereas MFP also meets in the middle. It can meet in the middle, meet wherever there is a joint point it meets the values and so if there was an example, a control flow graph like the one drawn here, then MOP would be, so let's say the value that's coming out of this basic block is x and the value that's coming on this basic block is y. Then the MOP solution is going to be fx meet with fy. So that's the value that's going to come out at the end of the program. Whereas the MFP solution is going to be first meet and then apply the transfer function. So it's going to be f of x meet y. And so just to see that more clearly, MFP is f of x meet y and MOP is f of x meet with f of y. So in one case, we are meeting after applying the transfer function. In the other case, we are first meeting and then applying the transfer function. And what do we know? What can we say about the MFP and MOP from this formulation? We know that from monotonicity, f of x meet y must always be less than equal to f of x meet f of y. That's coming from the monotonicity of the DFA framework. And from there, we basically say that MFP is less than equal to MOP. Moreover, if the DFA framework is distributed, recall that the reaching definitions framework was distributed, in which case fx meet y is equal to fx meet fy. For a distributed framework, it doesn't really matter whether you apply the transfer function first before meeting or whether you apply the meet operator first and then apply the transfer function. You always get the same result. And there's a well-formed check or expression that we can check to see whether some framework is distributed or not. And that is that we just check that for arbitrary x and y and for an arbitrary belonging to the family of transfer functions. Is it true that fx meet y equals fx meet fy? If that's true, then the framework is distributed. And if the framework is distributed, then this formulation also tells us that the MFP equals MOP. Recall that if a framework is distributed, it doesn't really matter whether you meet first or you meet second, right, or whether you apply the transfer function first or whether you meet first. And so it doesn't really matter. And so the MFP solution is also the MOP solution. To summarize, any fixed point solution is always less than equal to the maximum fixed point solution that's coming. We have discussed any fixed point solution can be a bad solution, but the most precise solution for a data flow system of data flow equations is the maximum fixed point solution. And we get it because we initialize all our interior values at the top. So fp is less than equal to MFP, MFP is less than equal to MOP, and MOP is less than equal to ideal. We just saw these relations between MFP, MOP, and ideal in this module. And that's the general case. But for distributed frameworks, instead of the less than equal to, we actually get MFP equals MOP, which is still less than equal to ideal, because ideal recall also basically distinguishes between paths that may be executed and paths that never execute. And that's an undecidable problem, so we don't even try to get to the ideal. But it's good to know that MFP is at least equal to MOP for distributed frameworks.
