Title: Compiler Design Module 11 : Context Free Grammar
Video ID: F6MU5HBUjd4
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

So today we are going to move beyond regular languages and it turns out that some intuitive languages are actually not regular. So here is an example of a language. This language accepts all strings which contain balanced parenthesis. So for example, it would accept any number of open parenthesis but it should be followed by exactly the same number of closed parenthesis. For any value of i, you can open the parenthesis any number of times. You need to count how many times did you open it so that you can close it exactly the same number of times. Now it turns out that this is not a regular language and intuitively this is not a regular language because recall that a regular language has the machine that is required to, that can identify a regular language like a DFA or an NFA has only a finite amount of memory. But this particular language requires potentially unbounded amount of memory depending on how big a i is and i is potentially unbounded, right? So for example, I could have an NFA that has a million states but if I have, if I use i which is greater than 1 million, let's say 2 million or something like that, then that NFA would not be able to maintain that much information that how much or in fact, you know, even if it used logarithmic encoding to encode how much the count i, I mean the logarithmic of an infinite amount of count is also infinite. So overall this language is not regular, all right? But this language is pretty intuitive and in fact, we use it all the time in our regular mathematical expressions where we use brackets. So in fact, many of our programming constructs also have this recursive structure. For example, scopes, functions and so on, you could have scope inside scope inside scope inside scope and this could go on forever. So this or expressions also have a lot of recursive structure within them. For example, you could have parentheses within parentheses inside an expression. You could have if-then-is within an if-then-is and so on and so forth. So a regular language usually does not suffice for doing something like that and so while the regular language is good for identifying tokens from characters usually, you know, for the whole language, a regular language is not usually enough. And so we need we need something more powerful and at this step, so once so now we're going to talk about parsing, which is a step above tokens, right? So lexical analysis was the task of converting a stream of characters to a stream of tokens. Parsing is going to take a stream of tokens or a sequence of tokens and convert it into a parse tree, a structured tree, right, which basically is able to match operators to their operands and things like that. For example, the parse tree of a language of balanced parentheses would basically match the outermost two parentheses and then say that the inner parentheses should also be balanced and so on, right? So for example, consider this this statement from your favorite programming language. If x is greater than equal to y, then z equals one semicolon else a equals z. Now this is no so this is this is just a string but let's assume that we have already performed lexical analysis on it and so we have a stream of tokens and the stream of tokens is basically let's say if is a keyword. So that's one token, x is an identifier, so that's another token, greater than equal to is yet another token, which would be the relational operator and so on, right? We already understood the mechanism to convert characters to tokens. But now once we have but now we just have a linear sequence of tokens, whereas this particular statement has a hierarchical structure to it. What is the hierarchical structure? Well, if you look at it, this whole sequence of tokens represents a single statement and in this particular case, it's an if-then-else statement. Further, there is a part of the if-then-else statement that is the relational expression and then there are statements corresponding to the then and the else clauses of the if-then-else statement. So before the compiler or the interpreter, for that matter, can try and interpret or specialize this particular program, it needs to identify what is this recursive structure and what do each of these things mean, right? In this case, we can build a parse tree to represent this recursive structure and it would be built something like the following. Basically, we would first identify that x greater than equal to y, these three tokens represent a relational expression. Similarly, z equals one semicolon represents a statement and similarly, a equals z semicolon represents another statement, all right? And then we are going to say that, okay, now I have a sentence which looks like if relational expression, then statement, else statement and this looks like a complete well-formed if-then-else statement and we are going to call that an if-then-else statement and at the top level, this is just a statement. We don't really care whether it's an if-then-else statement or not, for maybe the end user that what matters or for the, I mean, the whole program should probably be just a statement and so that is what it is. Now, this structure that we have just constructed, statement, if-then-else statement and then relational expression, statement, statement, notice that this is a tree structure. We can read it either bottom up or top down. Right now, I've drawn it as an inverted tree where the root is at the bottom but I could also have drawn it in the other way, in which case the root would have been at the top. So parsing is this process of converting a sequence of tokens to a parse tree like the one shown in this example, this is also called a parse tree. Alright, so such recursive structures are common and we already discussed that regular languages are insufficient to represent such recursive structures but there's another category of languages that's a more powerful and more bigger category of languages which is context-free languages, alright? And a context-free grammar can be used to specify a context-free language. Recall that regular expressions can be used to specify a regular language. Similarly, a context-free grammar can be used to specify a context-free language. Here's an example of a context-free grammar. So let's say I say I want to represent the language of expressions. So I can say that if expression, you know, if there are two expressions then I can always put a plus operator in the middle of them, between them, the two expressions and the resulting string or sequence of tokens would also be an expression, alright? Similarly, I could say that if there are three expressions then I can join them as such, expression question mark, expression colon expression and this would be a ternary expression supported by many programming languages, alright? We'll see this in more detail. So what is a context-free grammar more formally? It is a set of terminals, T. So what are terminals? This is just the alphabet of tokens. Recall that when we were talking about Lexing, we were talking about the alphabet of characters but terminals are basically the alphabet of tokens. So what are all the tokens that this grammar understands, right? So we need to have that set and that set is called, so each element of this set is called a terminal and this set entirely is called terminals and is represented by T, okay? Then a set of non-terminals, N. So we're going to see why do I need a non-terminal? Well, we're going to see that very soon. A start symbol S belonging to N, so this is going to represent how we can start, from where should we start identifying whether a sentence or a sequence of tokens belongs to the language or not and a set of productions and a set of productions, so notice this word productions, this is also something that we are defining here and what does the production look like? It looks like something like the following, X, right arrow, Y1, Y2, dot dot dot, YN. Here X must be a non-terminal, so that means X must belong to N, the set of non-terminals and each of the YIs, Y1, Y2, Y3 could be either a non-terminal or a terminal or it could even be an epsilon character, so epsilon just means the empty token, like no token basically, it's the empty sequence. So YI could be either a non-terminal or a terminal, so let's see an example to understand this better. So for example, if I wanted to represent the language of balanced parenthesis that we started with, we could represent this in a context free grammar as follows, let's say there's a symbol S, capital S, so this is the non-terminal and then create a production saying S, right arrow, open parenthesis, S, close parenthesis and capital S, right arrow, epsilon. So if this is my grammar, we're going to see why this grammar accepts the language of balanced parenthesis in a minute but before we do that, let's identify what are all the terminals in this language, well it turns out that the terminals are only, there's only one, there are actually two terminals, one is the open parenthesis token and the other is the close parenthesis token, notice that while I'm writing it as a character, these are really tokens if we are talking about parsing. What are the set of non-terminals in this grammar? Well actually there is only one non-terminal S and what is the start symbol? Recall that start symbol should be a non-terminal and it represents the non-terminal at which we should start, right and in this case there's only one non-terminal, it also happens to be our start symbol, all right. Now that we see this as an example of a grammar, let's see why does it accept the language of balanced parenthesis. So to understand that, we need to understand how to interpret these productions and these non-terminals. So productions can be read as replacement rules. So we begin with the start symbol, whatever is the start symbol that's specified by our grammar, let's say that start symbol is S, so we begin with the start symbol and at every step we can use the production to expand the current set of symbols that we have, all right. So this is how I'm going to do, I'm going to replace any non-terminal in the string with the RHS of some production. What is the RHS of some production? Recall that a production is basically a non-terminal right arrow and a string of YIs which could be either terminals or non-terminals. So everything on the right of the right arrow is the RHS and everything on the left of the right arrow is the LHS. So we can replace any non-terminal in the string with the RHS of some production x to y1 dot dot yn and we can repeat this step two until no non-terminals remain, okay. So let's see this further. So this process of kind of interpreting grammar is also called a derivation. So we could start with the symbol S and then we would search in the grammar for some production which has S on the left, on the LHS and then if we find something then we are going to non-deterministically choose it and if we choose it then we are going to expand it to whatever is the RHS of that vertical production. Let's call it alpha 0, right. Now inside alpha 0 we are going to again pick some non-terminal if 1 exists and then again expand it and so on. So from alpha 0 you may get alpha 1 and so on and you may get it till some number of steps say n steps where n is greater than equal to 0 and this whole process will be called a derivation. A derivation stops after n steps if and only if after n steps the string that I have alpha n contains only terminals and does not contain any non-terminals, alright. So alpha n contains only terminals. Okay and what does the step in the derivation look like? Alright so this is important. So let's say at any step I have this string x1 x2 dot dot dot xi and then let's say some non-terminal x and then xi plus 1 dot dot dot xn. Now I'm assuming here that x is a non-terminal whereas all the other xi's could be either non-terminal or terminals or could be the epsilon character. Okay so let's say at any step in the derivation so for example in the in the first step of the derivation I am guaranteed to have only one symbol x but maybe in the next step I have some some xi's and of which one of them is a non-terminal which I'm representing by x and all the other xi's on the left and on the right are could be either terminals or non-terminals. Now I could choose not there could be multiple non-terminals in the string and I could choose anyone non-deterministically. So let's say I chose x and then I can apply some derivation so let's say there was a derivation that says x goes to y1 y2 dot dot dot yi or let's say yk then I could expand x to y1 dot dot yk in this step of the derivation. So if this was alpha i then my new alpha i plus one which is the next step in the derivation is going to have everything else is going to remain the same which is x1 dot dot xi remains where it was xi plus one dot dot xn remain where it was but x itself is replaced by y1 dot dot yk this in other words we have expanded the production x produces y1 dot dot yk all right and recall that y1 dot dot yk could be either non-terminals or terminals and you keep doing this so so this is this whole process is derivation two things to note here we are choosing the non-terminal to expand non-deterministically we are also choosing which derivation to use non-deterministically and we are stopping only when there are no non-terminals left in our alpha n right so when all these things x1 dot dot xn and y1 dot dot yk become all terminals we are going to stop because there's no more product nothing more to produce okay all right so with that we can now define the language of a context-free grammar so let let g be a context-free grammar recall that we we represent g by four four quantities one is t which is the set of terminals n which is set of non-terminals s which represents the start symbol and p which is the set of productions which have an LHS and an RHS and the LHS is a non-terminal and RHS is a string of terminals non-terminals and the epsilon character the language now recall that so now we already defined what what could be a grammar right but now we want to find the meaning of a grammar or the language defined by a grammar the language of a grammar is basically all strings a1 dot dot an such that all the ai's belong to the terminal set so maybe they are the tokens in case of parsing and there exists a derivation that starting with s which produces this particular string right so note so so in other words if there exists a derivation starting from s to alpha zero alpha one dot dot dot such that i get a1 dot dot an where all these ai's are basically terminals which means i can't expand them now i reach the end of my derivation then then such a string belongs to the language represented by this grammar if there does not exist any such derivation then it does not belong to the grammar right so notice that this is the non-determinism is captured by the exist operator so if there exists a derivation that produces this string starting with s then that string belongs to the language otherwise it does not
