Title: Compiler Design Module 115 : Constructing Reducible Graphs
Video ID: xs_8omtT3Vo
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

So we've been talking about the dominator DFA analysis. We said that if we visit the nodes in reverse post-order, in a depth-first search order, then we can identify all the reverse post-order in a single pass, and then we can identify the dominators in a single pass. To identify the reverse post-order, we basically had this DFS algorithm. It says we basically initialize visited to false for every node. We start a counter to the maximum count, which is the count of the nodes, and then we keep decrementing it, and then we just implement a depth-first search procedure, and recall that a depth-first search procedure visits a node if it's not already been visited. So it visits any node at most once. After all the successes have been visited, it just assigns the depth-first number for the node, and if all the successes have already been visited, then it just assigns the depth-first number to the current node. And then it just decrements the, and it assigns it to C and then decrements C. So we argued that DFN contains the RPO numbering of the graph. We also said that there can be multiple RPOs for the same graph, and the different RPOs come from different choices of the order in which the successors are visited. So there's some non-determinism in the order in which the successors are visited. All right, so let's try to understand that a little bit more. So let's say I have this particular graph, then what is the DFN order or the reverse-post order? I'm also going to call it just the depth-first numbering or DFN. It's A, B, C, D. You can check it for yourself. You can run the algorithm in the previous slide on this particular example, and you're going to get A, B, C, D. Now, for this particular DFN, in this particular example, it turns out that there is a proper, there's only one depth-first numbering, but there could be multiple depth-first numberings for the same graph. We have seen this before. So, but for this particular depth-first numbering, if we basically just, you know, draw all the edges, then we see that most edges are basically in the forward direction, but some edges are in the reverse direction. By reverse direction, I mean the edge is going from a higher DFN number node to a lower DFN number node. So for example here, C is the higher DFN number node and B is the lower DFN number node, and this edge is going from a higher DFN number node to the lower DFN number node. And these such edges are going to be called retreating edges, all right? So I'm going to call this edge from C to B a retreating edge, whereas all the other edges are not retreating edges. And notice that a retreating edge is a property of a particular DFN. So for different DFNs, we may have different retreating edges, right? So let's see that with an example. So let's say I have this particular graph with A, B and C. A, there's edges from A to B and A to C. There are also edges from B to C and C to B. Now, we have seen this before that this particular graph has two different DFNs. One particular DFN is A, B, C, in which case if I draw the edges, then C to B is the retreating edge. But there's another DFN which is A, C, B, depending on which successor got enumerated first when I was looking at A's successors. And so A, C, B is also a valid RPO or a valid DFN based on algorithm. But when I do this, then B to C is the retreating edge. So you can see that depending on the DFN, the particular DFN that we got, the set of retreating edges can be different. In this example, the set of retreating edges is made up of the single element C to B. And in the second case, the set is also made up of a single element and that is B to C. All right, so retreating edge is a property of a particular DFN. But recall that back edges are not a property of a DFN, back edges are a property of the graph, right? So before we talk about back edges, let's define retreating edges. And edge M to N is a retreating edge if and only if, this is the definition of a retreating edge. DFN M, DFN of the source is greater than equal to DFN N, DFN of the destination of that edge. And this is for a particular DFN, we have already seen that. And this basically means that indicates that M was reached through N from entry during DFS traversal. So this can only happen if the DFN of M can be greater than equal to DFN of N for an edge M to N, only if M was reached during the DFS traversal through N. So first N was reached and then after N was reached, you were traversing the tree and then M was reached. And this also means that the lifetime of search M was contained in the lifetime of search N for that particular DFN, all right? So this can only happen if M's exploration, the exploration of M subtree was kind of a subset of the exploration of N's subtree. So if I was to draw the DFS traversal as a tree, then the subtree rooted at M would be a subset or a subtree of the subtree rooted at N. And you can check that. For all other cases, you would find that this kind of condition cannot be true that for an edge from M to N, DFN M is greater than equal to DFN N. So for every retreating edge, it basically means that N was reached through M. Now this also gives us a hint. If N was reached through M from the start node, then clearly, and there's an edge, then all such, if I was to ask whether M can dominate N or not, then the answer is, well, one of the things is if DFN of M is less than, I want to ask whether N can dominate M or not. So if I want to ask the question N dom N, all right? If I want to ask this question, then basically, you know, one way to have a quick check is, does DFN of N, is this greater than equal to DFN of N or less than equal to, right? And I can ask this question. And if it is greater than equal to, if it is greater than equal to, then the answer is definitely no, right? Because if N dominates N, then N should have been visited before M. And if N should have been visited before M, then N should have had a smaller DFN number. And so if, you know, this is an easy check, that if DFN N is greater than equal to DFN M, then N does not dominate M. The other way is not true, right? So it's possible that DFN N is less than DFN M and yet N does not dominate M, all right? So it's not, so it gives us some hint about the relationship between retreating edges and back edges. Recall that for a back edge, the destination should dominate the source. For a retreating edge, the destination should have a lower DFN number than the source. And so we are saying that for dominators, the dominating node should always have a lower DFN number than the source. So this basically means that all back edges should be a subset of all the retreating edges because for some node to dominate some other node, if A dominates B, then it must be true that for any DFN, any DFS traversal, DFN of A is less than equal to DFN of B. All right, so recall what is a back edge. A back edge is an edge M to N such that N dominates M. And from that we can derive the theorem that every back edge is a retreating edge for any DFN. So we take any DFN, it must be true that whatever are the retreating edges for that particular DFN, that set of retreating edges must contain the set of back edges of the program, but not vice versa. It's not necessary that every retreating edge is a back edge. And the argument is exactly what I said earlier. Back edge requires a stronger property that the destination dominates the source. Retreating edge requires a weaker property that the DFN number of the destination is smaller than the DFN number of the source. One implies the other, but not the other way around. So if N dominates M, then it must be true that DFN of N is less than equal to DFN of M, but not vice versa. And so every back edge is a retreating edge, but every retreating edge is not necessarily a back edge. So here is, you know, recall that we were interested in finding back edges. So in this particular graph, what are the back edges? Notice that there are multiple cycles. So there's a cycle between B and C. There's a cycle between A and C. And I claim that the only back edges are C to A. So if I look at this graph, we know that A dominates B and A dominates C, but B does not dominate C and BC does not dominate A. B, and so the only back edge is, you know, the only edge that basically has a destination dominating the source is the edge C to A. But if I look at DFN number one, it would be ABC. If I look at DFN number two, it would be ACD. The retreating edges of DFN number one would be C to B and C to A. The retreating edges of DFN number two would be B to C and C to A. And in this example, notice that, I mean, that's just coming from the DFN, right? So C to B is actually a retreating edge in this DFN, and B to C is the retreating edge in this DFN. And notice that in both cases, C to A is always present as part of the set of retreating edges. Irrespective of which DFN I got, the back edges will always be present in the set of retreating edges. Even though different DFNs give different set of retreating edges, we have a nice property that the back edges are always present in the set of retreating edges. Now, from this, we get a nice definition. We say that a control flow graph is reducible if and only if all the retreating edges in any depth-first numbering are also back edges, all right? So basically we want that for any DFN numbering, if I identify the retreating edges, then all those retreating edges should be back edges. So here are examples of reducible graphs. This one is a reducible graph. This one is a reducible graph. But here, this is not a reducible graph. So pretty much if the cycles in the graph are natural loops, all cycles in the graphs are natural loops, then they are reducible graphs. Both these cases, all cycles are natural loops. You can check that. But this case, all cycles are not natural loops because this particular cycle between the second and the third node is not a natural loop. So all cycles in a reducible graph are natural loops. And we can also define the loop nesting depth of a reducible graph. L1 is less than L2 if L1 is nested in L2 and the depth of a reducible graph, the loop nesting depth, is the longest chain of such less than relationships in a graph. So we already talked about nesting of loops and based on that nesting of loops, we can draw a hierarchy of nesting between loops and the maximum length of such a chain is going to be the loop nesting depth of that graph. Here are examples. This is a depth one CFG and this is a depth two CFG because it has two loops, one nested inside the other. So after we have identified the back edge, we need to identify the natural loop associated with the back edge, all right? And to do that, we basically need to identify all the nodes that can reach the source of the back edge. So let's say the back edge was n to d, then we want to identify all the nodes that can reach n without going through d. And one easy way to do that is to remove d from the CFG and then find all the nodes that can reach n in the modified CFG. And that's just the transitive closure. This is just a naive explanation of what could be done to identify all the nodes of a natural loop. You could do something smarter. You don't really need to remove d, but you can just modify your transitive closure algorithm so that it does not consider edges that are incident to the node d. So this is a way to basically construct the natural loop once you have identified all the back edges. Also, we talked about what is a reducible graph. A reducible graph is a graph where every cycle is also a natural loop. But what if we have a non-reducible graph? So first of all, luckily, as I said before, most programs produce reducible graphs. And that is a property that comes from the structuredness of our high-level programming languages. And that's one reason why the use of control flow constructs like Goto is discouraged, because Goto can produce potentially non-reducible graphs. And because most programs are reducible in nature, or in other words, they produce reducible CFGs, we focus our optimization effort on reducible graphs because that makes the problem simpler because the graphs are more structured. But if I have a non-reducible graph, then often I need to convert it to a reducible graph so that I can run my algorithms. And so the good news is that every non-reducible graph can be converted to a reducible graph. However, the bad news is that it may require code duplication. So one of the canonical examples or patterns of a non-reducible graph is this cycle which has two entry points, right? A reducible graph is a graph where every cycle has only one entry point. And so if I want to draw a non-reducible graph, the easiest thing to do is create a cycle and then have two entry points to that cycle. Now, if I wanted to convert this graph or this pattern to a reducible graph, then I can do this by code duplication. For example, I could duplicate this node C and I could have C prime and C and then have some of the edges that are incoming to C come to the original C and some of the edges come to C prime. For example, I have decided that C prime is the node that's going to be part of the loop and C is going to have all the other incoming edges. And this way, this loop B on C prime becomes a natural loop. And so I've been able to convert the cycle into a natural loop and still maintain the semantics of the program. The problem here is that I have increased code size because I have duplicated the node C. And there exists an algorithm to do this in the most general case, but the problem is because of this duplication of nodes, it can potentially lead to exponential growth in code size. And this is a negative of this algorithm that converts irreducible graphs to reducible graphs. Fortunately, most graphs are reducible and even if they have irreducibility, then it would be a very local thing and it was possible to resolve that using code duplication as discussed in this slide.
