Title: Compiler Design Module 99 : Family of Transfer Functions
Video ID: hNPqzwXXNrE
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

So, we've been talking about the dataflow analysis framework and we specifically focused on the semi-lattice. We discussed how a semi-lattice can be represented, how it can be represented as a product of smaller semi-lattices and also we talked about one important property of a semi-lattice which is the height of semi-lattice. Now the other part of a dataflow framework, recall, is F. So, recall that a DFA is defined by F, V and the meet operator. V and the meet operator together basically form a semi-lattice and F is basically a family of transfer functions, right? So we haven't really discussed F at all so far and that's what we're going to do now. So what is F? F is a family of transfer functions. So what does that mean? What does a family of transfer functions mean? Well, it means that the transfer function for any instruction or any basic block in the program will be one of the functions in capital F. So capital F is a set of transfer functions and any transfer function that is used for any instruction for a particular dataflow analysis that is represented by F, V and the meet operator is basically, so any transfer function for any instruction for that particular dataflow analysis is drawn from F. That's what it means, alright? So that's why it's called a family of transfer functions or set of transfer functions. So the transfer function for an instruction or a basic block is one of the functions in F, alright? So we basically need to have a family of functions and we have a restriction that any transfer function should be one of these functions, right? It cannot be any arbitrary function, alright? Recall that if the function doesn't have certain properties then the dataflow analysis cannot terminate and so the reason for being able to define a family of functions is so that we can have properties for capital F and using those properties we can reason about the convergence and optimality properties of the DFA, alright? So what are the properties that the family of transfer functions F must have? Well, it must have the following properties. Every function small f in capital F should have the form V to V which means it takes a value from the set V which is the set of dataflow analysis values and then it turns a value V. So for example if it's reaching definitions then it takes a set of reaching definitions and returns an other set of reaching definitions. If it's constant propagation for a single variable it takes one of those values top, bottom or constant and then it returns one of these three values also. By three I mean it could be any constant, it's actually an infinite set of values but whatever those values are it takes one of those values and then it turns one of those values back. That's what a transfer function is supposed to do. For example if I'm talking about sets of constant definitions when I'm doing constant propagation for multiple variables in one go then it's a set of constant relationships or set of constant definitions and then that's what is going to be an element in the set V. And so every transfer function small f in capital F must have this form that takes a value from V and returns a value again drawn from V. So that's expected. The other property is that capital F there must be an identity function in capital F. So there must exist a small f in capital F such that fx is equal to x for all x belonging to V. So I should say for all x belonging to V. So there must be a special function which is the identity function and that's a necessity, that's a property that I need from capital F to be able to reason about interesting properties of the DFA. Intuitively why do I need the identity function? Well because it's possible that an instruction is a no op. And so if it's a no op basically I want to have this property that the output is equal to input. And so the transfer function for the no op instruction which means it does not not doing anything should be basically the identity function and that should be a part of my family of transfer functions that are permissible for this particular DFA. And the third important property is that f is closed under composition. So f is closed under composition. What does closed under composition mean? Well it means that if there are two functions f1 and f2, any two functions f1 and f2 that I can draw from capital F, then it must be true that f1 composed with f2 also belongs to capital F. So I take any two functions from capital F and compose them the resulting function should also belong to capital F. That's what it means. That's what I mean when I say closed under composition. So just to elaborate more on what does composition mean, what does f1 composed with f2 mean? Well this is the definition f1 composed with f2 of an input x is nothing but first apply f1 then apply f2, right? So that's what composition means. First apply f1 then you apply f2 on the input value and whatever is the result that comes out as the resulting value. And recall notice that this is a valid application because f1 of x is also going to return some value in V and then you can apply f2 to it and once again you're going to get a value in V. So f needs to be closed under composition and that's another important property that I require from capital F to have a good DFA, to have a DFA for which I can reason about. So we're going to talk about what are the properties that I need, what are the properties I can prove using these facts for the DFA later on but let's at least understand what are the properties I need from capital F. Okay, so let's take an example. Recall that many of our data flow analyses are of the form kill something from x and then add something to it, all right? So f1 x equals x minus kill one in this case union gen one for let's say some instruction or statement S1 or some basic block B1, all right? So f1 x equals x minus kill one union gen one. So the kill and gen are basically properties of S1. So kill one is some property of S1, gen one is some property of S1 for some data flow analysis. Recall that many data flow analysis have this form. For example, reaching definitions, must reach definitions, liveness analysis, constant propagation, all of these at least there are some formulations for these problems which the transfer function can just be expressed using the kill and the gen functions, kill and the gen functions where these are just functions, kill and gen are just functions of the statement and nothing else. So kill and gen are independent of x, all right? So that's important. Similarly, f2 x can be x minus kill two union gen two for some statement S2, okay? And so I can say that, okay, f1 and f2 belong to capital F. So what is the family that I'm assuming here? The family of transfer functions is different functions for f1 and f2 and generally any f for different values of gen and kill, all right? So I can just say, okay, gen includes all the definitions or gen includes the empty set or gen includes 10 definitions or gen includes only one definition. Similarly, kill can have anything, right? So I can have any gen and any kill and all such functions that are formed by different combinations of gen and kill basically form the different functions that belong to capital F, all right? And so different functions are obtained for different values of gen and kill. And notice that the number of functions are actually pretty big, right? So for example, if I have gen, if I have reaching definitions, then what are the number of possible values for kill? Well, if I have n definitions, then the number of possible values for kill is all possible subsets of those n definitions, is 2 to the power n. Similarly, what is the number of values that are possible for gen? Once again, it is 2 to the power n. And so what is the total number of possible transfer functions? Well, you can take any combination of those. So that would be 2 to the power n x 2 to the power n, all right? And this entire set of functions basically forms a family of transfer functions for reaching definitions, for example, all right? So different functions are obtained for different values of gen and kill. My first question is, is this family, does this family obey the properties that we have listed out in the previous slide? So the first question here is, does it take a value in V and return a value in V? Well, the answer is yes, because x is supposed to be a set. And the return value is also the set of the same type, right? So whatever is the type of x is also going to be the return value, so that's clear. The second question is, does the family of transfer function have an identity function, all right? Does there belong a small f to that? Does there exist a small f which we have f x equals x? And the answer is yes. You just need to use gen equals the empty set and kill equals the empty set and there you go. That basically gives you the identity function and that indeed belongs to my capital F because as I said, I can take any value of gen and kill and such a function should belong to my set of transfer functions. The identity function indeed belongs to my family of transfer functions, capital F. And what about composition? So is it closed under composition? Well, for that we need to check what does f2 of f1 of x return? That's what the computation that would be formed by f1 composed with f2. And so first apply f1 and then apply f2. And that's going to be recall, this is something that we have discussed before. If I just represent that using, just substitute x, f1's expression into f2, and I just reorder and simplify. And then I'm going to get something like the following. X minus kill one union kill two union, gen two union, gen one minus kill one. All right, so this is what I get for f2 of f1 of x. And does this belong to my family of transfer functions f? The question is, the other way to pose this question is, is it possible to write this expression on the right as x minus kill three union gen three for some kill three and gen three? And the answer is actually, yes. This quantity here can be represented as kill of one composed with two. And this quantity here can be composed as gen of one union, one composed with two. Notice that both quantities are still independent of x. And they are only a function of x1 and x2. And so indeed, this family of transfer functions is closed under composition because the composed function also has the same form. And so it is also guaranteed to belong to the family of transfer functions f.
