Title: Compiler Design Module 116 : Symbolic Analysis of Loops
Video ID: 1-vB-pdrfss
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

So, we are now going to discuss analyses that go beyond the data flow analysis and that was one of the primary reasons that we started defining loops and natural loops because we wanted to do deeper analyses on loops. So, today we're going to talk about symbolic analysis of loops. So to motivate the need for such an analysis, let's look at this particular example. So let's say I initialize sum to s, i to 0 and then I have a natural loop. In the natural loop, there's a loop condition which checks whether i is less than n, n could be either a variable or a constant, but it is loop invariant, so n is not modified inside the loop. Alright, so I call it loop invariant and so then I say ai plus equals sum, so I'm modifying location ai, notice that in this particular statement every iteration is going to modify a different location because i is going to be different in every iteration. I'd say sum plus equals i and then I say i plus plus, so this is a loop that increments i on every iteration until it reaches n and also computes sum and also modifies an array element. Now the question here is can we execute different iterations of this loop in parallel on n processors? So let's say I have n processors and let's say n was a constant. It could be any other variable, so let's say I have more than n processors and so I need to parallelize this loop and the question is can I do that? And the answer seems, if I just look at data dependencies, the first iteration computes sum and that is again used in the second iteration. So there are data dependencies, there are read after write data dependencies from one iteration to the next. For example, the sum variable itself is getting updated in let's say one iteration and the result of that updation is being used in the next iteration because I am accumulating into sum. In fact, similarly, i is getting accumulated into and so the result that is produced in one iteration is going to get used in the next iteration because that is what one is going to get added to. So there are data dependencies across iterations and so if I just look at it naively then then it seems that this loop cannot be parallelized, I cannot execute each iteration of the loop in parallel with other iterations of the loop. But let's look at, you know, can I apply data flow analysis, the common ones that we know and maybe the data flow analysis is going to give me enough information so that I can now start parallelizing the loop. So things like, you know, we have discussed perhaps the DFA's like concept propagation or common sub-expression elimination or some other data flow analysis that we have discussed. Do they help? Well, the answer is that they do not help and I will show that with an example of common sub-expression elimination. So recall that when we want to do common sub-expression elimination, we basically run a data flow analysis called available expressions. So if I run available expressions on this particular program, what I get is, at this particular point, we have two available expressions, zero is available in i and s is available in sum, all right? So that's what the available expressions is going to give me here. But what about this point? Notice that this is the head of the loop and so one of the incoming edges is the entry of the loop and the other incoming edge is the back edge of the loop. And so here, is some value available in i? The answer is no because it's changing on every iteration. So there is no value available in i. Is there some value available in sum? The answer is no because once again, sum is being modified in every iteration, it is going to have a different value on every iteration. And so the set of available expressions here at this particular point at the loop head is just the empty set. And similarly, the set of available expressions at all other points in the loop, you will find is just the empty set because I cannot actually say that some expression, some static expression is available by looking at the program statically in some variable at any of these program points that lie within the loop. And notice that there's one more program point, which is the exit of the loop. And at this point also, I cannot really claim that I have some relationship between the available expressions and some variables. So I wrote my set of available expressions even at the exit is empty. Now, is that the ideal solution? And I'm going to say that if I look at the program and I reason about it, then I can basically say that at this particular point, there is a relationship between sum and I, and how do I identify that relationship? Well, it's coming from the fact that sum represents the addition or the sum of the first I numbers at any iteration. So at this particular point, sum would be the sum of first I numbers. And so that information is not being discovered by our common sub-expression elimination analysis. Because if we knew that sum is the sum of the first I numbers, then first I natural numbers, then what I could have simply done is I could have used the identity and said, sum is equal to I into I minus 1 by 2 or something like that. So the solution for available expressions that would have been a better solution, a better solution than what our DFA produces, could have been the following. That in the beginning of the loop, we still have I, 0 and sum, S. But at the head of the loop, now instead of the empty set, I have this information that sum is S plus I into I minus 1 by 2. Now notice that this expression S plus I into I minus 1 by 2 is not really appearing in the program anywhere, and that's why our available expressions DFA was not able to infer this relationship. But if I was to do a more sophisticated analysis, I would have liked that sophisticated analysis to infer this relationship between sum and I and S for us. Similarly, at this particular program point, I would have the same relationship, sum is S plus I into I minus 1 by 2. Then on the exit, I would have some relationship, and I'm going to come to that. But on the loop body, we're going to have the same relationship, and I'm going to say AI plus equals sum. Now notice that here, because I know that sum is S plus I into I minus 1 by 2, here I could have just replaced sum with S plus I into I minus 1 by 2. And you may say, why does it make sense to actually repeat the computation? You are already computing it in sum, but it would help in parallelization, as we're going to see later. So the question that I had started asking was, can I parallelize each iteration of this loop? And now what I've done is, if I know that sum is nothing, but sum can be expressed in terms of I, then I could remove or eliminate some of the data dependencies across iterations. And indeed, the sophisticated analysis that I'm hoping for is going to give me some relationship, and that is sum is equal to S plus I into I minus 1 by 2. Now similarly, when I say sum plus equals I, now the relationship changes. Now it is not just the sum of the first I minus 1 numbers, but it's now the sum of first I numbers, natural numbers. And so it becomes S plus I into I plus 1 by 2, instead of I minus 1 by 2. And similarly, now we have increment I, and now once again, because I has been incremented, this relationship changes and becomes S plus I into I minus 1 by 2. So notice the subtle difference. Earlier it was S plus I into I minus 1 by 2, then it became I into I plus 1 by 2, and then after I got incremented, it again became I into I minus 1 by 2. Now all this requires sophisticated analysis that is beyond the scope of the data flow analysis that we have talked so far. And so this kind of analysis is going to be called the symbolic analysis of loops, and we're going to discuss how to do something like this in the next few modules. Also notice that there's a loop exit, and so using an analysis on the loops, I may be able to infer that when the loop exits, then I would be equal to N, because I starts at zero, gets incremented, until I is less than N, so it exits the loop only when I equals N, and so I can say that at exit, I would be equal to N, or in other words, the available expressions would contain I comma N. And similarly, I would have sum is S plus N into N minus 1 by 2, and that's just coming from this fact that just previously it was sum is S plus I into I minus 1 by 2, and I equals N, so from that I know sum is S plus N into N minus 1 by 2. Now once again, these are nice relationships to have through our available expressions analysis, but the DFA that as we have discussed so far is incapable of generating such relationships. So what we require for such results from our analysis is we require a loop level analysis. We need to understand what the loop is actually trying to do, and this kind of loop level analysis is called a symbolic analysis of the loops, where we try to understand how the variables are evolving across iterations. So I'm going to discuss how symbolic analysis may work in the next few modules, but I'm going to give you a brief overview of how it may work, and the basic idea here is that we're going to compute the transfer function of a loop iteration. By the transfer function of a loop iteration, I basically mean the transfer function of the body of the loop, and I'm going to call that FB, all right? So for example, the body of the loop is consisting of these two basic blocks, I less than N and this basic block containing three statements without the back edge, all right? And so the body of the loop has one entry and two exits, one is the exit of the loop and one is the back edge, but the body doesn't have the back edge, so we're going to treat the back edge also as an exit of the body. And then we're going to use sophisticated reasoning to try and summarize K iterations of the body. So we know what is FB, we're going to first identify what is FB as a symbolic function. So if something comes in, what comes out? And now once I have FB, then I'm going to use symbolic analysis or sophisticated reasoning to say, what if I concatenate FB or compose FB with itself K times and I'm going to call, I'm calling it FB to the power K, all right? So FB composed with itself K times. And what is FB to the power K? You can think of it as FB to the power K equals FB to the power K minus one composed with FB, all right, for K greater than one, okay? And if K is equal to one, then FB to the power one is just FB, all right? What does composition mean? Well, we know that already, FB to the power K of any input X is, you first apply FB to the power K minus one to X and then you apply FB to it. And so this way I'm defining FB to the power K inductively. Similarly, I could say FB to the power K minus one, there's nothing but composition of FB to the power K minus two and FB till I reach K equals one. Okay, so once I know FB, I'm saying that I can use symbolic analysis to be able to see if I can summarize FB to the power K in a more precise way and that's exactly what a symbolic analysis is going to do. So this is what a symbolic analysis, this is what we are going to call a symbolic analysis. So let's try to understand what would a symbolic analysis do. I'm not going to talk about how the symbolic analysis is being implemented at this stage. We're going to discuss how in later modules, but at least what will the symbolic analysis be expected to do in this example. So let's say FB is, so firstly, what is FB? FB takes an input machine state which contains let's say available expression map. So I'm calling the map M and M is a map from variables to their values or their expressions. So that's why it's called available expression and then it returns another map, which is the new map. And so for example, so this is what FB's shape is going to be what FB's type is going to be. And using this type, I'm going to try to infer what is FB to the power K for some K. So for example, what is FB for this particular loop? Well, if I say that M, recall that M is nothing but a map. So I could say MI is the expression corresponding to I in the map. And if there is no expression corresponding to I in map, then this would just be bottom and then anything that is kind of added or subtracted from bottom is just bottom. So I could concisely specify that M prime of I is nothing but MI or plus one. So whatever, if the input map M maps I to some value V, then the output map M prime would map I to some value V plus one. That's what this statement M prime I equals MI plus one means. But whatever M is mapping I to, let's say it's V, then M prime would map the same I to V plus one. In other words, M prime I would be equal to MI plus one. Similarly, I could say, and this is just coming from the statements, right? From the statements, I can identify these transfer functions. M prime sum equals M sum plus MI. So how do I say that? Because the input value is MI, and then I add that to the input value M sum, and that's the new value of sum. And so M prime sum becomes M sum plus MI. So in the new map, the sum value is going to be mapped to an expression which has the old expression for sum plus the old expression for I. Notice that subtlety here, M sum plus MI, not M sum plus M prime I, because notice that I'm using the old value of I to add to sum, because sum plus equals I is occurring before I plus plus. And so it's the old value of I, and so if sum plus equals I was occurring after I plus plus, then I would have had M prime I here. So based on this body, just analyzing this body or the function, I'm able to identify the transfer function in a symbolic way, say M prime sum equals M sum plus MI. Now, once I have this, now I want to basically generalize this for K iterations or K compositions of FB. And so this is what it's going to look like. I'd say M, so just like I have M prime for one iteration or one application of FB, I'm going to say M prime K is the map that's generated by K applications of FB. And so M prime K equals FB to the power K of M. And now I can see that if one iteration is incrementing I by one, then just using symbolic analysis, you know, just using some mathematical identities. By symbolic analysis, I mean some sophisticated mathematical reasoning. That's very easy to us to kind of do this. You know, easy to see this as humans is it's basically M. If one iteration increments by one, then K iterations is going to increment by K, right? And such rules, such axioms can be coded up in our symbolic analysis, hard coded in our symbolic analysis so that whenever you see this kind of pattern, then you basically say that, you know, K compositions of this function is just going to multiply this increment by K. And so M K prime I equals MI plus K. And so I could have some rules that basically says that if one application of the transfer function increments the variable by X, then K applications of the transfer function will increment the same function by K into X, where X I'm assuming is a constant. But what about M K prime sum? So we know M prime sum equals M sum plus MI. How do I compose K applications of the same transfer functions to generate the map M K prime and for sum? So what should be the expression for sum? If the input expression was M sum, then what should be the expression for M prime K sum? Now, this is also easy to see. Once again, I can use some symbolic analysis, some algebraic identities to see that sum is basically the sum of the first K numbers. And so that way, and then I can use the algebraic, well known algebraic identity that the sum of first K numbers is nothing but K into K plus one by two and things like that. And so that's what I'm going to do. I'm just going to expand, our symbolic analysis is going to expand M K prime sum equals M prime K minus one sum. So to be able to solve for M K prime, I'm going to expand this one iteration at a time and recall that M prime sum was M sum plus MI. So M K prime sum is M K minus one prime sum plus M K minus one prime I. I'm just using the definition of one application of FB in this particular expansion. And now once I have that, then I know that M K prime I, M K minus one prime I is nothing but K minus one, MI plus K minus one, because M K prime I for any K is basically MI plus K and so M K prime I, M K minus one prime I is nothing but MI plus K minus one. So from this, I'm being able to expand this for K minus one, right? Okay, so I get MI plus K minus one for M K prime, M K minus one prime I, and now I need to expand M K minus one prime sum. And notice that I basically have M K prime sum equals M K minus one prime sum plus MI plus K minus one. MI is independent of K, K minus one decreases by one for every K. And so what I get is, eventually I can kind of have an identity which says that if you ever see this kind of a recurrence, then you can just multiply K for the constant element, which is MI, independent of K. And then you can say summation of K one to K minus one, or zero to K minus one. And so that's what my next expansion is going to look like. I'm going to say this is nothing but M K minus one, this is nothing but K into MI, because MI is appearing for every expansion, for every single expansion. So I'm going to, for K expansion, I'm just going to multiply K with it. The end base case is going to produce M sum, because M prime sum is nothing but M sum plus MI. And so that's going to produce M sum. MI is going to be, MI has already been folded into K into MI. And then I have a summation from J equals zero to K minus one of J. And finally, I'm going to be able to simplify this to K into MI plus M of sum plus K into K minus one by two, where K is the number of iterations of the loop that I've executed. Now notice that I'm able to talk about the number of iterations of a loop that I've executed because it's a loop with a single entry. So I know that it's the same head that's going to get visited over and over again across different iterations. And because of that, I can kind of talk about the transfer function of a single iteration and its composition for K times, and where K is the number of iterations of the loop that I've executed so far. And so if K is the number of iterations that I've executed so far, I can say that the map for sum is going to have the expression K into MI plus M sum plus K into K minus one by two. And similarly, the map for I after K iterations is going to be MI plus K. Notice that this kind of analysis is basically more sophisticated than a data flow analysis. We are generating expressions that didn't actually necessarily exist in the original program, such as K into K minus one by two, but they can be inferred by using properties of the loop and algebraic properties of the values that are being computed upon. Finally, I know that MI, which is the input value, the value of I when the loop was first entered, because I know that at input, I already know that we have the available expression I comma zero. So I can replace MI with zero. That is coming from the DFA, available expressions DFA. At this particular point, the map is going to map the value of I to expression zero. Similarly, it maps the variable sum to expression S. And so I can replace MI with zero and M sum with S. And so what I eventually left with, so this requires symbolic analysis of the loop body as you've already seen. And what I'm eventually left with is MK prime I is K and MK prime sum is S plus K into K minus one by two. So now I've been able to talk about the expressions available in each variable after K iterations of the loop. And I can use this to identify relationships among the variables. So for example, if I know that after K iterations, I equals K, then I can just say after K iterations, sum equals S plus, here I have K into K minus one by two, but because I equals K, I can just say S plus I into I minus one by two. So although I'm doing the symbolic analysis with respect to the number of iterations of the loop that I've executed, I can now use these relationships to also identify relationships between different program variables, which do not include K. So here I will be able to identify relationships between sum and I. Also, I would be able to say that, oh, I is getting incremented, so MK prime after K iterations, I is K, and I exit the loop when I becomes greater than equal to N, and initially I was zero. So what do I know when the loop exits? I would be able to say, once again, I could use algebraic reasoning to say that, oh, I starts at zero, I gets incremented by one on every iteration. The loop exits when I becomes greater than equal to N, which basically means that loop must exit when I becomes equal to N. And so at the exit point, I would be able to identify that. You know, one of the points here is that after K iterations, I would be equal to K, and so after how many iterations would I exit the loop? Well, when the number of iterations, K would be greater than equal to N, because it will execute, exit the loop when I would be greater than equal to N, I equals K, so K should be greater than equal to N, and so K would be exactly N, right? Because the first time I do this, I'm going to exit the loop. And so when I exit the loop, I know that K would be equal to N, and from that, I would be able to identify available expressions for the exit of the loop, which would be, I would be just N, and sum would be S plus N into N minus one by two. So I'm going to introduce a term, it's called the loop trip count. Loop trip count is a number of loop body executions between the loop entry and loop exit. And I'm going to try to estimate the loop trip count also using symbolic analysis of a loop. So now that we have identified the natural loop, we are able to do symbolic analysis on the transfer function of the natural loop. We want to use the symbolic analysis to identify as many properties of the loop as possible. And one of the properties is the loop trip count. And I'm saying that I'm going to use the symbolic analysis, the transfer function, to also estimate the loop trip count. So we already discussed this, I already know that MI equals zero, the input value, the first value to I, at the first entry of the loop is just zero. After the Kth iteration, the value of I is K. Exit condition is that I should be greater than equal to N or MK prime I should be greater than equal to N. All these three basically together imply that the number of iterations that the loop is going to execute for is going to be N. And from that, we're going to know that the loop trip count of this loop is N. Once again, I'm not discussing how the symbolic analysis works, I'm just saying that there is some analysis that's going to be able to apply these algebraic axioms to decipher these properties of the loop. And from here, I'm going to be able to say that the loop trip count is N. Moreover, I'm going to be able to say that at exit, MN prime I, so because N is the number of iterations the loop is going to execute, MN prime I would be N, and MN prime sum would be S plus N into N minus one by two. Notice that I'm just replacing K by N in our algebraic identity that we get inferred in the previous slide. And so at exit, we will have these relationships and more available expressions. With all this complicated symbolic analysis, we achieve more precise DFL solution through this loop level symbolic analysis. Basically, the way it works is we introduce a variable called K, which represents the loop trip count so far, how many times the loop has gone through since its last entry. The same loop may have been entered multiple times. Let's say it was the inner loop. Then maybe the first time it got entered was the first iteration of the outer loop. The second time it got entered was the second iteration of the outer loop and so on. When we talk about the loop trip count of a loop, we are talking about the number of iterations of the loop since the last entry into the loop. And so even if this is enclosed in an outside loop and that outside loop has executed hundreds of times, the first, you know, the first, this time when it enters, I'm going to call it the first entry. And based on that, I would basically be able to identify these relationships. We have seen these relationships earlier. We're going to say sum is S, I is zero, K is zero at here. So basically one way to think about it is that at entry, I set K to be zero. At the back edge, I say K plus plus, and everything else remains the same. K is the loop trip count variable. And based on this, I do symbolic analysis to identify relationships between sum and K and I and K, okay? We have already seen these kinds of things. Now, based on this analysis and these relationships, it is now possible to execute each iteration in parallel. How? Because now I know that we know sum as a function of loop invariant variables S and the loop iteration variable K. Similarly, I know I as just the loop iteration variable K. And so the update of AI can be done in each separately in each iteration because different iterations are going to execute different locations of memory because AI is going to be different for different values of I. And we also know what is the value that needs to be added because sum is no longer dependent. The value of the current iteration of sum, the value of sum in the current iteration is no longer dependent on the value of sum in the previous iteration because I've been able to identify that sum is nothing but S plus K into K minus one by two. And so each iteration can independently set, identify what is the sum for that particular iteration, what would have the sum have been for that particular iteration and then update I independently. And so what we have been able to do is eliminate data dependencies across iterations using this symbolic analysis.
