Title: Compiler Design Module 67 : Operational Semantics for Function Call Dispatch
Video ID: cbjUZSAmK4Y
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

So we've been discussing semantics and we will discuss the semantics of one final construct in our CC++-like language, and that is function call dispatch. So what does a function call look like in our language? Well, let's assume for a general case that it could be a member function. So you say you specify the class, on which the class object on which the function is called. And so that object itself is specified using some expression, e0, dot f, which is the name of the function, and then all the arguments specified by expressions, e1, e2, dot, dot, en. And so this function needs to be implemented. And the question is, so we already seen ways of generating code for such a function call dispatch. The question is what should be the abstract semantics of such a function call such that they capture exactly what is supposed to be done and only what is supposed to be done and nothing extra. We want to keep it as abstract as possible. All right, so here's what needs to be done. You need to evaluate the arguments, e1, dot, dot, en, in that order, all right? So the order also matters because each of these expression evaluations can have side effects. Recall that we said that in our language, we are assuming that most of the, almost all the processing that we discussed is from left to right, but maybe in a language like C or C++, the order may be different, or actually in C, C++, the order is unspecified, but that's an aside. Then e0 is the target object on which this member function is being called, okay? If it was not a member function, then that just becomes a degenerate case of this discussion. And so we'll just discuss the more interesting case, which is when it is a member function. And let X be the dynamic type of the target object, right? So let X be the dynamic type of the target object. Recall that dynamic type is the type at the time of runtime, and it may be different for different executions of the same piece of code because it depends on the runtime values and runtime types. And based on that, determine F, which should have N arguments. Now recall that we said because of polymorphism, it's possible that the same name has multiple definitions with different number of arguments or different types of arguments. So when you determine F, you need to worry about that. Also when you determine F, you need to worry about whether it is a virtual function or whether it is a non-virtual function. So recall that a virtual function has dynamic dispatch, whereas a non-virtual function has static dispatch. And both have different semantics because in the case of dynamic dispatch, the dynamic type is used to identify the implementation that needs to be used. In the case of static dispatch, it is the static type that is used to identify which function needs to be called. So I'm not going to discuss how F is getting determined in this EMA semantics. We're just going to assume that the semantics for determining F are specified elsewhere. So we are not discussing those semantic rules, although we need to specify those semantic rules formally as well. But we are not doing that in this exercise. But whatever it is, it is either a dynamically-dispatched function or a statically-dispatched function. The only difference is which F it is. And that is just kind of encapsulated in these words, determine F. So that's it. And we don't really talk about how we determine F and all that. That would be a different set of rules. Okay, and once you have determined F, you need to actually implement the dispatch. So how do you do that? You create N new locations in the store and you create a variable environment that maps F's formal arguments to these locations, right? So you just create a new environment in which this function call is going to get executed. And then because of static scoping, you need to create a new variable environment because it's a new scope. The variables that are available are totally different. In particular, the formal arguments of the callee function are available in the environment. And also you need to create new locations to store the actual arguments and those locations need to be mapped through the variable environment. This is something that we have already seen. And initialize these locations with the actual arguments, which are the arguments at the caller side, the values of the computed by E1, E2, dot, dot, EN. And finally, set the this to the target object and evaluate F's body, all right? So just set, change the self object, this object, which is S0 to whatever is computed through E0. And then you have the new environment through the new environment. You have the new environment, the updated store and the new object. And under this new environment, in the context, we want to evaluate the body of F. Okay, so before we can start, let's represent F by its containing class X, its arguments X1, dot, dot, X. And so when I say determine F, F is not just a name, but a definition. And what all does definition entail? It entails the class in which it has been defined. So let's say X, it entails all the formal arguments, X1, dot, dot, XN, which are the names of the arguments given at the declaration of the function. And then it has a body of the function, which is E body, all right? And okay, so that's good. And so we're going to represent this as implementation of X, comma, F equals X1, dot, dot, XN and E body. So all the formal arguments and the body. And the body recall is just an expression in our language. And so that's how we're going to represent this. And we're going to use this kind of representation in our semantic rules, which we're going to discuss next. All right, so we want to basically have a rule which basically assigns a value or evaluates the value of this expression E0, dot, F applied to E1, dot, dot, EN. And also we want to determine what are the side effects on the store because of this evaluation. Under the context S0, E, S as we've been doing all along. So we already discussed the informal things that need to be done. Recall that the first thing needs to be done is evaluate E0, E1, E2, EN. And so we're going to do that. So we first evaluate, let's say E1, E2, EN and we evaluate it in the order. The order is encoded by the fact that the side effects of E1 in S1 are used while evaluating E2 and so on, right? So there is a dependency here, right? From S1, on S1, from evaluation of E1 to E2. So E2 can be only evaluated after E1 has been evaluated and so on, okay? And then we also evaluate E0. So in these semantics, for example, we're going to say that all the arguments are evaluated first and then the target object is evaluated, okay? So for some reason, we have decided that E0 will be evaluated at the very end. We could have chosen a different order. It's just a matter of choice of semantics. But notice that these are subtle things that we sometimes may ignore, but these are very important, right? Because SN is used as context while evaluating E0 and this is important, okay? And then we say, okay, let V0 be a class, object of class X with attributes A1 equals L1.an equals Ln. And let F be a function in X such that its formal arguments are X1..xn and it has a body, E-body. Then we are going to allocate new locations for this dispatch, function called dispatch. And these locations are going to correspond to the formal arguments of the function. So we say Lx1 equals new log Sn plus one. So Sn plus one is the store that contains the side effects of evaluating all the expressions E1..en and E0. And so new log Sn plus one and Lx2 is new log Sn plus one union Lx1 and so on. So this whole block here is basically saying that allocate N new locations such that they are all mutually distinct and they're also distinct from the locations that are already mapped in Sn plus one, okay? And finally, we also create a new environment which uses status scoping rules. So for example, A1 which is the first formal argument maps to L1 in this environment, A2 maps to L2, An maps to Ln. And also we basically say, okay, so this is, all right, so A1, A2, An are basically the attributes of the class, right? So when we are executing the member function, one of the things in our language is that the member function may refer to the member fields of the class. So the first thing that the environment needs to have are all the attribute to location mappings for that particular this object, right? And so A1 to L1, A2 to L2, An to Ln, these are just the attributes of the class. And then we say that let's also change this so that X1 now maps to Lx1, the newly allocated location, X2 maps to Lx2, and so on, Xn maps to Lxn. What are X1, X2, Xn? X1, X2, Xn are the formal argument names, right? Because recall that implementation of Xf is X1, X2, Xn, an E body. So X1, X2, Xn are just the formal argument names coming from the implementation of X and that's what X1 is. And what do we want to replace them, map them to for E prime? We want to map them to Lx1, Lx2, Lxn. What are Lx1, Lx2, newly allocated locations. Also notice that this choice of actually doing the syntax of using, just first mapping all the attributes and then mapping all the arguments. There is a significance to doing this. The other option could have been I just kind of, in the same way, just kind of say An, Ln, and then X1, Lx1, and so on in a single array, but the problem with that is that it's possible that the name of a formal argument, aliases, or X1 can have the same name as A1, or A2, or An, whatever, right? And so we want to say that if they have the same name, then which one should get precedence? And in this, we are clearly saying that the Xs, the X1, X2, Xs should get precedence if they have the same name. So if there's a name conflict, just like in static scoping, we say the innermost scope wins here also. It's the innermost scope, which is the names of the formal arguments that win, and that's the significance of writing it like this. And also, we need to create a new store because in the new store, we are going to actually map those newly allocated locations, Lx1, Lx2, Lxn, to the actual argument values, which were V1, V2, and Vn. So we say Sn plus one, modified such that Lx1 is mapped to V1, Lxn is mapped to Vn. And that gives us a store Sn plus two. And now we have E prime and Sn plus two, and these are the environment and the store under which the body should get evaluated. The only thing is we need to also change this object, and so this is the final part of our rule. V zero, which is what was evaluated through E zero, is the value of this object. E prime, which is the new environment, Sn plus two, the updated store, evaluate E body, and let's say it evaluates to V, Sn plus three, then this entire function dispatch also evaluates to V, Sn plus three. Our rule is almost complete, except that notice that we allocated new locations using the new lock operator in Lx1, Lx2, dot dot Lxn. And this, we haven't, you know, we haven't, these locations are still available in Sn plus three, and even after the function call dispatches over, these locations will continue to remain allocated in Sn plus three. And if you recall from our declaration rule, that amounts to a memory leak, and if we use such semantics, then it burdens the code generator or the compiler because it has to keep, maintain these locations and the contents, even long after the function call dispatch has completed. This is not what we want. And so the complete rule, in fact, involves subtracting these locations, Lx1, Lx2, dot dot dot Lxn from Sn plus three. And so this is our final dispatch rule.
