Title: Compiler Design Module 106 : Lazy Code Motion Problem
Video ID: We3LEZklr8U
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

So, now that we are familiar with partial redundancy elimination, the problem of partial redundancy elimination, let's look at some examples to see what the program could be transformed using PRA. So, just to recap, what is the problem of partial redundancy elimination? We want all redundant computations of expressions that can be eliminated without code duplication to be eliminated. So, all redundant computations on expressions that can be eliminated without code duplication on any of the program paths. I'm not really now explicitly saying on any program path, it is implicit in these statements that if something is redundant on any path, then it is partially redundant or simply redundant. So that's one part of the problem that we want to solve. The other part of the problem is that the optimized program does not perform any computations that were not already present in the original program. So recall that we only move computation up, we hoist a computation only if it was going to be computed on all possible paths from that particular program point. So, it shouldn't happen that on some of the program paths, some computation was not present in the original program, but is now present in the transformed program because that would be counterproductive. We're just going to make one path faster, we are making another path slower and so we don't want to do that. We don't want to introduce any extra computations on any other path or any path of the program. Not any other path, but we don't want to introduce extra computations on any path of the program. Now, that's the problem of partial redundancy elimination. A slight variant of this problem is called lazy code motion. So this is the problem of lazy code motion, which basically has both the first two conditions, but it also has a third condition. And the third condition is that expressions are computed at the latest possible time. Now, what this means is that expressions are computed lazily and that's why the term lazy code motion, they are computed as late as possible. When I say as late as possible, probably they are computed before their first use on that particular path, just before their first use on that particular path. Why do we want to compute expressions as late as possible? Because if we compute the expressions too early, then we have to maintain some storage space to store the value of the expression. And so that's going to add to our register pressure because we have to kind of keep that that many registers around either on the register or on the memory slot or something like that. But we don't want to do that. So lazy code motion is an extra constraint, adds an extra constraint to the problem of partial redundancy elimination. And that is that expressions are computed as lazily as possible or at the last latest possible time. So let's look at an example to understand what is lazy code motion. So here is an example that contains two loops, an example program. And in the first loop, it's just some block D1. And then on the second loop, there is an expression that's M plus N, which is redundantly being computed on the loop paths. And so partial redundancy elimination should implement loop invariant code motion. And A equals M plus N should be hoisted out of the second loop. But here is one possible solution. And the solution is that you hoist the computation of M plus N right to the beginning of a program, right? So basically say T equals M plus N. Then we have the original B1 loop. That's our first loop in the original program. And then in the second loop, I replace M plus N with T. And so that way I have been able to eliminate the redundant computations of M plus N in the second loop. But while this eliminates all partial redundancy, it is not a valid solution to a lazy code motion problem. So it's a valid solution to the partial redundancy elimination problem, but not a valid solution to the lazy code motion problem. Because we are basically having to maintain the value T across the entire duration of the loop B1, even though it was not even used in the loop B1. And so that's just going to eat up one extra register for us. And we don't want to do that. And that's why this extra constraint of compute as lazily as possible or at the latest possible time. And so this third solution here is the acceptable solution under the lazy code motion problem. Here I compute M plus N after B1, but before the second loop, all right? After this first loop and before the second loop. And this way I'm both eliminating partial redundancies and I'm computing the expression at the latest possible time. All right. So to recap, we make a distinction between full redundancy and partial redundancy. If I am computing some expression E, let's say M plus N at some location and I'm storing it in X, then I may have multiple program paths that are coming into this program point. Now, E is fully redundant at this particular program point if it is available on all incoming paths. And that is something that is captured using the available expressions analysis that we use for common sub-expression elimination. E is partially redundant if it is available on some but not all incoming paths. So maybe E is available on one of the paths and not on other, or maybe it's available on some subset of the incoming paths and not some other subset of the incoming paths. So, for example, in this example, if let's say A equals E is present on one of the paths or on some of the paths, but it's not present on the some of the other paths, then E is partially redundant at this program point S. Now, our goal in the algorithm of partial redundancy elimination and lazy code motion is that we want to place additional copies of E in the control flow graph so that it becomes fully redundant at S. So we want to put extra copies, for example, on this path of the computation of E such that it becomes fully redundant on S. And when it becomes fully redundant at S, then it can be eliminated, right? So, I cannot eliminate the computation of E at this point if it is partially redundant because on some of the paths, it's not even available. So what I do is I place extra copies of E on those paths where it is not available so that it becomes fully redundant at S. And once it becomes fully redundant at S, then I can eliminate the computation of E and replace it by the stored value, let's say T here. So I can say X equals T if T is where the computation is available on all paths. So, for example, in this particular example, I would say, you know, on this particular path, E was already available. I just ensure that it's available in a particular temporary variable called T. And then I use A equals T. And then on the other path, I just say T equals E. So I create an extra copy. The moment I create an extra copy of E on this path, E becomes fully redundant at S. And so at S, I can just replace E with T, right? So this is the point S, OK? So this is the kind of transformation that I am going to do in my lazy code motion algorithm. So I'm going to talk about some examples to further understand what is the problem of lazy code motion. We're not going to discuss the algorithm in this module. We'll do that in the next module. But in this module, we are at least going to look at all the particular examples to understand what transformations are required for what kind of program. So here is an example. Here we have A equals B plus C. Then there are multiple paths. And then I have D equals B plus C. Now at this particular point, B plus C is fully redundant because it's available on all incoming paths. And so this is very similar to our available expressions. But recall that partial redundancy elimination and lazy code motion subsume common sub-expression elimination. And so just like common sub-expression elimination, our lazy code motion algorithm should also make this transformation. It should compute B plus C into a temporary variable T, replace all occurrences of B plus C with T. So A equals T, D equals T. So this is what should happen in this particular example for lazy code motion. Now let's change that example a little bit. Let's say on one of the paths I am updating the value of B. Now at this particular point, B plus C is only partially redundant. It is not fully redundant because on this particular path, it is not redundant because I actually need to compute, recompute B plus C. But on this particular path, B plus C is redundant because I already have B plus C computed in the variable A. So I could have, on this particular path, I could have replaced D equals B plus C with D equals A. But on this particular path, I cannot do that. And so I need to recompute it. So the lazy code motion algorithm should transform, ideally, the program like this. Recall that we want to place extra copies of B plus C so that it becomes fully redundant at this point, while the extra places where it is added, it is not redundant. Right. So, so this is what should happen. Recall that we are not allowed to duplicate code, but we are allowed to add extra basic blocks. And so I just add an extra basic block here on this particular path where it was not redundant, where it had to be re-computed. And I recompute on that particular path. On this particular path, it was redundant. And so I don't recompute it. And I just say D equals T, right? So I replace A equals B plus C with T equals B plus C and A equals T. On this particular path, I just said D equals T. On this particular path, I said T equals B plus C and then the same statement D equals T can be reused for that. So this is the transformation for this particular example that is expected from lazy code motion. Now, let's change the example a little bit. Let's say that I have A equals B plus C on one of the paths. And in the other path, I have B equals 7 and then F equals B plus C. And on the joint point, I have D equals B plus C. Now, again, I'm looking at this particular location and I'm saying, is B plus C available on all program paths? Well, on this particular program path, it's available in variable A. On this particular program path, it's available in variable F. So how do I solve that problem? Well, this is something that we have been doing all along anyway. We just introduce a new variable and we don't worry about copies because we assume that copies are going to be taken care of later on by copy propagation. And so we just introduce T equals B plus C. And here we say A equals T. Similarly, here we introduce T equals B plus C and we say F equals T. And here we say D equals T. And so this way, we have eliminated redundancy at this particular program point. Notice that in the original program, there was redundancy on all program paths. So B plus C was actually fully redundant. But only problem was that it was available in different registers on different paths. We were able to solve this problem by introducing a new temporary variable T and using that, we were able to eliminate redundancy on all the paths. OK, now let's take another example. Here, B plus C is available on only one of the paths. It's not available on the other path. And so how do we deal with this? Well, this is something that we have sort of seen in one of the previous examples as well. We say T equals B plus C, A equals T. And on this particular path, we add a basic block and say T equals B plus C. It is not necessary here to add a basic block. We could have also added T equals B plus C to the previous basic block at the end of it. We are anyway going to do such, you know, we can do these kind of coalescing of basic blocks later on. It's just easy to think about it as an addition of a basic block and adding addition which computes the expression of interest, in this case, B plus C. Now, let's look at this particular example. Here, there are multiple program paths. So let's look at this program point. And so there are three paths that are reaching this program point. Similarly, if I look at this program point, there are two paths that are reaching this program point. And A plus B is being redundantly computed on some of those paths. So, for example, on this particular program path, A plus B is redundantly computed. It's actually being computed thrice on this program path. So it is being redundantly computed twice. So the second and third time, it really didn't have to be computed. But on this particular program path, I need to have A equals B. Similarly, on this particular path, I need to have A equals B. So once again, what do I expect my lazy code motion algorithm to do? I wanted to add the computation of A plus B, make copies of it at the appropriate point so that A plus B becomes fully redundant, wherever it is partially redundant. And so for that, all I will do is I will add computations of A plus B on this path and this path. And I'm going to do my usual introduction of a temporary variable, T. Say T equals A plus B, X equals T. Here, I'm going to add T equals A plus B. And now A plus B has become fully redundant there. And it's available in the variable T. And so I say Y equals T. Similarly, on this program path, I say T equals A plus B and the size Z equals T. Now, on all three program paths, the expression A plus B is not being computed redundantly. It's only been computed once. Okay. Now, let's look at an example that has a loop, all right? So we have X equals A plus B. And then I have this program. It has Y equals A plus B. And inside the loop, there's some branching. And then we go back to the loop head. And then this is a loop exit. Now, is A plus B being computed redundantly in this program? The answer is yes. If you look at this particular program path here, then A plus B is already available in the location X. And it is being randomly computed for location Y. I could have potentially said Y equals X. If I look at this program path here, this, the right side, the right back edge, the right loop, the right side of the loop, then again, A plus B is being computed redundantly on every iteration. It's already available in Y and X. And I don't really need to recompute it, but I'm really computing it over and over again. And so there is a lot of redundancy here in the computation of A plus B on this part of the loop. However, if I look at the other part of the loop, which is this part here, then it seems like it is not redundant because I've updated A. And so after I've updated A, I need to recompute A plus B because A plus B is no longer available in Y because I've updated A. You may say, oh, after the first iteration, it will be available. So let me just make this a little bit more interesting. Let me say A equals A plus one or something like that, something which is a variable, right? Or instead of A equals 10, maybe I could have said A equals C or something like that, some extra variable. So now on this particular path, it is not redundant, okay? But on this particular path, it is redundant. And so it is the classic case of partial redundancy. At this particular program point, it is not fully redundant, but it is partially redundant because it is redundant on some of the incoming program paths. On what path is it redundant? It's redundant on the right side path and the incoming path, but it's not redundant on the left side loop path. All right. So how do I solve this problem? What do I expect my lazy code motion algorithm to return as an answer for this particular program? Well, notice that I basically have, on this particular program path, A plus B is not redundant, whereas on some other path, it is redundant. So what do I need to do? I need to add copies of A plus B on the paths where it is not available so that it becomes fully redundant at this particular program point. So how do I do that? Well, here's what I can do. I can add the computation of A plus B here after A has been updated. So instead of A equals 10, let me just say A equals C. All right, and C is some variable that's changing throughout the program, let's say. So now this is, you know, I'm claiming that after I add T equals A plus B here and also, you know, at the first instruction, I also use T equals A plus B and then X equals T, then A plus B becomes fully redundant at this particular program point because it's now going to be available on all possible incoming paths. So what are all the possible incoming paths at this program point? One is the entry path, which is just coming straight. So it's available there in variable T. Another is a loop that is taken, the one iteration of the loop from the right side, even there, it is available in the variable T because, you know, nothing has changed, neither A nor B has changed and T still holds A plus B. So on this path, A plus B is available in T. Similarly, on this path, A has changed, but T, we have recomputed A plus B into T and so once again, on this path also, A plus B is available on T. And I can take any number of iterations. In fact, I can kind of first take the right part of the loop, then take the right left part and whatever path I create for this particular program, I will see that at this particular program point, A plus B is available on all incoming paths because of this extra copy of A plus B on this path. And so now I am able to remove A plus B's computation and replace it with Y equals T. So the other thing I need to check here is that I haven't added the computation of A plus B on a path where it was not already present. So I have made a copy of A plus B on this particular path and is it possible that I have added A plus B is computation to a path where it was not already present. So let's look at this particular path. I enter and then I take the left side of the loop and then I come back here. So on this part of the loop, so let me just draw it. So let's say this is my path. On this path, it may seem that initially that, oh, I'm computing A plus B on this path whereas it was not originally going to be computed on this path. But the fact is that it would have been computed, it would have been computed here. So I haven't really, because when I say a program path, I mean a program path that goes through the program and then goes all the way to the exit. So there are so many different program paths that are possible that go from the start of the program to the end of the program. And so one of the program paths may be let's say this one. And if you see this program path already had an A plus B computation in the original program. The program path would have been this one. And here there is a computation of A plus B after A equals C. And even here, there's a computation. So here there is a computation of A plus B after A equals C because on this path, I just assign A equals C and then I recompute A plus B. And that computation is still present on this particular program path. I haven't really introduced an extra computation on this path. And in fact, one can prove that in this transformation, I haven't really added the computation of A plus B on any path where it was not already being computed. And so I'm also satisfying my second condition. So I've been able to remove the redundancy on all paths for A plus B. And I'm also ensuring that I have not introduced an extra computation in the program that was not already present in the original program on any path. All right, now let's look at another example. And let's say this is a loop. It says A equals B plus C and then B equals read where read is supposed to be some random value that it's assigned to be. Now, is B plus C being computed randomly? Well, is it available on any program path here? It's not available on the initial program path that's coming from the outside of entry of the program. It's not available. B plus C is not available. Is it available on the loop path? No, it is not even available on the loop path. So B plus C is neither partially redundant nor fully redundant at this particular program point. And so I'm going to just leave the program unchanged. So I expect my lazy code motion algorithm to just leave this program unchanged. Okay, let's take another example. Let's say I have a loop. Let's say A equals B plus C and then I basically compute going around the loop. Now, here it seems that B plus C is actually redundant on the loop path because in the first iteration I would have computed B plus C. And then when I come into the second iteration I'm again recomputing B plus C even though B plus C is already available in the variable A. So what do I expect my lazy code motion algorithm to do? Well, one response is that why don't we do loop invariant code motion because B plus C are loop invariant. Notice that in the previous example that I had on the previous slide, B plus C were not loop invariant because I had B equals read. But here B plus C are loop invariant. So I could move A equals B plus C outside the loop. And so that would potentially eliminate redundancy. However, that would also violate our second condition of the problem which is that I shouldn't introduce an extra computation on any of the paths. So what's the problem on this particular path on this particular path here? B plus C is not even getting computed, right? So the path that comes from the entry and then goes all the way to exit. B plus C is not even getting computed. However, if I hoist B plus C here, if I put B plus C here, then that would be wrong because now I'm adding extra computations on some of the paths where they were not already present in the original program. Now in this particular example, it seems like the second constraint is kind of holding us back. In this program, I'll probably be recomputing B plus C millions of times if the loop iterates millions of times. And it would be such a nice optimization if I could have just hoisted B plus C above the loop and that way I would have only computed once. But just because of one particular path that is not even going to be executed most of the time, B plus C was never computed on this path in the original program but now it is being computed in the new program, in the transform program, I'm being disallowed from doing so. But we are not going to allow this to happen. Even though this looks very attractive, very tempting to basically hoist B plus C above the loop, we are not going to allow our algorithm to do that. And there are a couple of reasons for that. One is of course that this particular path has become slower. But then there is a more involved reason and the involved reason is that B plus C is computation. And so recall that when I use the operator plus, I'm just using it as a placeholder for some operator. And it is possible that this computation could have resulted in an exception, in an error. And so if the program was not going to even go, compute it in the original program, then if I hoist the computation above, then the original program would have a different behavior from the new program. The original program would have not had any error, but the new program would now have the error. And so that is not acceptable. And so we have the second rule in our second requirement of our problem and that we want to strictly obey it. And so what we expect our lazy code motion algorithm to do is it's not going to change this program at all. It's not going to hoist A equals B plus C above the loop because that's going to add computation that was not already present in the original program on some of the paths. Here is the last example that I want to discuss. And this is an interesting example because here we're going to see that redundancy elimination is not always possible. Even in the previous example, we saw a conflict between redundancy elimination and addition of computation on some of the paths. And we decided to be more conservative and we didn't eliminate the redundancy because we don't want to add extra computation on in the new program. Similar thing is going to appear here. So I have X equals A plus B, Y equals A plus B. I have a loop here, but then I also have an exit. Now we can see that here A plus B is redundant on some of the paths. What are the paths? Well, for example, if I look at this particular path here, it is redundant, all right? And so we can feel tempted to copy A plus B somewhere here, all right? And I say, okay, let's compute A plus B here. And this is similar to the pattern that we have seen in one of our previous examples. And then when I compute A plus B here, then A plus B would likely become fully redundant here and I can replace it with Y equals D. But there is a problem with that. If I put A plus B here, then let's look at this particular path here, this path. Now on this path, A plus B was not computed after A was set to 10, right? On the original program, all right? So let me use a different picture. So in the original program, so I'm looking at this particular path, so this is my original program. On this particular path here, A plus B is computed twice but then after A has been set to 10, I don't recompute A plus B. Whereas if I now put A plus B here, then I would be computing A plus B on that path. And once again, I'm going to violate my second requirement of the algorithm. And so I'm not going to change this program at all. And I'm going to leave this program as is because once again, I'm going to strictly follow my second requirement. I don't want to add computation on paths where it was not already present because A, I'm going to be making those paths slower and B, more critically and more importantly, if the computation resulted in some kind of error, for example, it was resulting in a segmentation fault. Maybe it's a dereference, A plus B was A, recall that plus is just a placeholder. So maybe it's some dereference. And if it caused the segmentation fault, then in the original program, if the program was going to take this particular path, there wouldn't have been a segmentation fault. But now if I voice the computation and copy it here, then there would be a segmentation fault and we don't want it. And so this program, once again, we're going to live with the redundancy because we don't want to add extra computation in other places. So to summarize, we have a bunch of requirements, the three requirements that I had on the initial slide for the lazy code motion problem. Wherever there is a conflict of one requirement with the other, especially the first two requirements, we side on the safe side, we go to the safe side. We don't want to add redundant extra computation in the transform program, even though that means we have to live with more redundant computations in our optimized program.
