Title: Compiler Design Module 40 : Type Environments
Video ID: -H1w-WiJyEo
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

So we have already looked at some typing rules, but consider this particular typing rule which involves a variable. So let's say I have a typing rule that says X is available. Then what should be the type of X? And maybe I wanna give it a name var. Now recall that in our abstract syntax tree, we only have this information that X is available. We don't really have information about what is the type of X, how was it declared and so on. Because recall that the abstract syntax tree is formed using a context tree grammar. And this kind of information about the type of X, et cetera, is basically coming from the context of where X is being used. And so I cannot actually just define a type for X unless I know what is the context in which X appeared. And so I really don't know the answer to this question. And so I need to have some kind of an environment. I need to basically say that this is the current environment and based on this, I will be able to assign a type to a variable like X. So I'm gonna define the notion of a type environment. And a type environment gives types for free variables. Now I'm defining another new term. I'm introducing a term called free variables. What is a free variable? A variable is free in an expression if it is not defined within the expression, all right? So for example, the expression X, it doesn't contain a definition of X, it's just use of X. And so that would be a free variable. So let's look at free variables with some examples. So is the variable X free in the expression X? The answer is yes, we just answered it. But let me just make it a little bit different. Is the variable X free in the expression one plus X? And the answer is still yes, because X hasn't been defined. Is variable X free in the expression X equals zero? The answer is again yes. X is being assigned a value, which is just an expression and it's been assigned the value zero. But there's no definition of X in our C-like language. The definition is basically done using a declaration in the type of X and then X. For example, I'll say int X or bool X or a pointer X or something like that. And so this is still, the answer is still yes. All right? Is variable X free in the expression int X, X equals zero? And the whole thing inside a new scope. Recall that in our language, this whole thing is considered as one expression. And inside the expression, we are doing a declaration and some statement, which is the body. And is X a free variable in this? So by X, I really am referring to this particular usage of X, right? Or this particular usage of X. So these are usages of X. And so are these usages free? The answer is no, all right? Because X is being defined here and then being used. So it's not a free variable. It's part of the expression, all right? Because it's being defined and used within the expression. Is X a free variable in expression int Y equals one and X equals X plus Y? So here, inside the expression, I'm defining a new variable Y. And then I'm saying X equals X plus Y. So is Y a free variable in this expression? The answer is no, just like it is not a free variable. Just by the previous argument. Is X a free variable in this expression? The answer is yes, because X has not been defined here. It's just being used here, all right? So that's the idea of a free variable. A type environment is a function from object identifiers like X to their types, right? And okay, so that's what a type environment is. It's just a map or a function from object identifiers with object names to their types, all right? And so we're going to assume that we have such an environment available. And we are going to change our claims from just saying that it is provable that expression E has type T. Instead, we are going to have a sentence of the following form. O, turnstile operator, E's colon T, which is supposed to be read as under the assumption that free variables have the types given by O, where O represents the type environment. So under the assumption that free variables have the types given by O, it is provable that E is of type T, right? So the only thing I have done is I have added one more hypothesis on the left side of the turnstile operator. And my new judgments or claims or sentences are going to have this particular form. O, turnstile E colon T. And once again, it's read as under the assumption that free variables have the types given by O, it is provable that E is of type T. So this part, it is provable that E is of type T is just like earlier. The only change is in this blue phrase under the assumption that free variables have the types given by O. So existing rules actually still hold. All our rules hold. For example, here's one rule that says if I is an integer literal, for example, if I is one, then under an arbitrary environment O, it is provable that I is of type int. And this is my revised rule int. The only difference between the previous version and this version is that I now have an O on the left of the turnstile operator. And it says under the environment O, it is true that I is of type int. Now notice because this environment O is arbitrary, there is no hypothesis that constrains what O should be. It pretty much means that under any environment O, I is of type int if I is an integer literal. So under any environment O, one is of type int, two is of type int, and so on. And so we can use O as an arbitrary identity, type environment, identify for an arbitrary type environment as being used here. Here's another rule which was for addition of two integers. So everything remains the same, except that everywhere I have a typing judgment, I have an O on the left of it. So it says if under type environment O, it is provable that E1 is of type T1, so that T1 is a subtype of int. And under the same type environment, if it is true, if it is provable that E2 is of type T2, and T2 is a subtype of int, then under the same type environment O, it is true that E1 plus E2 is of type int. Now clearly, the only change here is that I put O everywhere where there was a typing judgment. But there is a meaning to it, saying that it needs to be the same O in all the three places. So it needs to be O here, O here, and then the conclusion says that under the same type environment O, E1 plus E2 is of type int. So these are the only changes that we have to make to our typing rules to be able to accommodate a type environment. And notice that even in the addition rule, the O can be arbitrary. It can be an arbitrary environment. The only restriction here is that it needs to be, it needs to be derivable or provable that E1 is of type T1 and E2 is of type T1 under the same type environment O. And the conclusion also uses the same type environment O, the same arbitrary type environment O. Apart from the existing rules, we'll add new rules because of the type environment. And here is a rule which basically gives a type to a variable X. So if the type environment maps a variable X to an arbitrary type T, then under the type environment O, it is provable that X is of type T reference. And this is my variable rule. This is a new rule that is being introduced because of type environments. And notice that inside the type environment, I'm keeping an association with the X with a variable name to its value type. Whereas in the typing judgment, I am assigning a reference type to the variable X. Recall that because the reference type is a subtype of the corresponding value type, X can be used anywhere a value, a term of value type was expected, but it can also be used in other places. For example, it can be used in the LHS of an assignment. This kind of rule we're going to see next will be useful when we are going to try to tie expressions that involve scopes, new scopes and new declarations as we're going to see next. But once again, if the type environment maps a variable X to a type T, then it is true that under that same type environment O, it is provable that X is of type T reference. Okay, so now let's see that rule being applied to get types for more elaborate expressions. In particular, I'm interested in typing this expression where there's a new scope and a variable X is declared with type T zero in the new scope. And then the body of the scope is E separated by a semicolon from the declaration. Recall that inside the body of this scope, I want to be able to assign values to X and it should still be a type-correct expression. So when will this be a type-correct expression? Well, this whole expression here, this whole expression here will be a type-correct expression if E is a type-correct expression under an environment where X has been mapped to T zero. And if under that updated environment where X has been mapped to T zero, if E is of type T, then this whole expression is also of type T. So that's what this rule says. It says under an arbitrary environment O, this whole expression evaluates to type T if under O updated with a mapping of type T, then a new mapping from X to T zero, this is a syntax for T zero for X. So in other words, update O such that X, the identified X now maps to T zero. If X did not already exist in O, then a new mapping is created from X to T zero. If X already existed in O, then that mapping is overwritten. Let's say X was mapping to some arbitrary type TX, then that TX is overwritten with T zero. That's what the syntax means. We'll explain that later on as well. Under the updated environment, if E evaluates to type T, then under the original environment, this whole expression evaluates to type T. And we call this rule the declaration rule. And because we are not initializing the initial value of X, we say declaration without initialization or declaration no in it. Now, what does O T for X mean? So here we are using O T zero for X, but in general O T for X represents a function such that O T for X applied to the variable X just gives me T. So that's what updating the mapping for X to T means. But for all other variables Y, such that Y is not equal to X, O T of this expression here maps, or this function here maps Y to whatever O map Y to. So this is basically what O updated with T for X represents. It represents a function such that it maps X to T, but it maps all other variables Y not equal to X to whatever the original function O map it to. And with that, we have been able to, with the help of this function O updated with T for X, we have been able to write the typing rule for our declaration no in it.
