Title: Compiler Design Module 81 : Liveness Property
Video ID: T8MZJ5J-tLA
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

So, now that we have learned about constant propagation and how to represent it as a data flow analysis, we also learned about why a data flow analysis is like constant propagation is guaranteed to converge because we reasoned about the orderings and the fact that the values can only move in one direction of that ordering. 

Let's discuss another data flow analysis which is the liveness analysis. And to motivate liveness, let's consider a familiar example of four basic blocks. In the first basic block, we are assigning x to 3, the other basic blocks are just assigning to y, and then in the fourth basic block, which is also a meet point for the two different paths, true and false, and here basically we had, we originally had A colon equals 2 into x, but now because of constant propagation, we have replaced x with 3. So now, this has been basically transformed to A is colon equal to 6, and so now x is no longer being used here, and the question now is, can we just remove, can we get rid of this statement, can we eliminate this statement, this instruction which assigns 3 to x? And the answer is actually depends, 

it depends on whether x is being used anywhere else in the program or not. So for example, if there was another path that was branching from, let's say this particular basic block, and there there was some assignment that was using x, then it is not okay to remove this x, we cannot get rid of the statement. On the other hand, if there was nothing of the sort, then it's okay, right, then it's okay to remove the statement. And so once again, this is an example of a property that requires the knowledge of the entire program to be able to perform a transformation, right? In this case, I want to know whether x is colon equal to 3 is dead code or not, and in order to be able to reason about whether x is colon equal to 3 is dead code, I want to know whether in the downstream logic of the program, this value of x, can it ever be used or not? And if it can never be used in the downstream logic, then I can remove it. If it may be used in the downstream logic on some path, then I cannot remove it. And so this is one of those global analyses that again, we would need to do some kind of global reasoning to make local transformations. And so data flow analysis is exactly the kind of framework that we have developed to do these kinds of things. We need to understand how we are going to adapt the data flow analysis to do this type of analysis. So this is another example of data flow analysis. And the idea is to introduce you to another type of data flow analysis before we actually start about the theoretical underpinnings of DFA. 

All right. So the question to ask here is, is x live? So I'm introducing the term live or dead at this statement. And when I say at this statement, I'm actually asking, is the program, is x live or dead at just after this statement? All right. So in constant propagation, you recall that you may recall that we were asking the question, is x a constant just before the statement? Here we are asking the question, is x live just after the statement? What does live mean? Live basically means, is this value of x, the current value of x at this program point, is it possible for the program to use this value anywhere in the downstream logic of the program? And if the value is dead, it basically means that it's definitely not going to be used in any of the program parts in the downstream logic from this program point. So once again, we are interested in asking the question, is x live at this program point or not? And here for a given statement, I'm interested in the point that is just after the statement. This is in contrast to constant propagation, where we were interested in the point just before the statement. All right. 

OK. So let's take an example to understand what is live and what is dead. So let's take this straight line piece of code. Let's say x is assigned 3, then x is assigned 4, then y is assigned z, then w is assigned x, and then you exit. All right. And I want to know what are the points at which x is live and what are the points at which x is dead. And this will also help us understand what is the meaning of live and dead. So first of all, I will say that at this particular point just before the exit, x is dead. Because I'm assuming that once the program exits, the value of x is meaningless. I mean, it's not going to get used anywhere. It's basically being, you know, it's not going to get used. So I can just assume that just before exit, it is dead. That's what dead means. That from here on, x is not going to get used. So I can say it's dead. What about just before w is colon equal to x? Is it dead or is it live? The answer is it is live because it's being used in this assignment to w. So unless I don't maintain this value of x, I won't be able to execute this statement which assigns x to w. So one way to think about liveness is do I need to maintain this value for the program logic to be executed correctly? Right. And indeed, at this particular point, I need to maintain the value of x for w is colon equal to x to execute correctly. What about this point just before y is colon equal to z? Now, once again, even though y is colon equal to z is not using x, but the statement just after that is using x. And so x is live because downstream, maybe not immediately, but maybe two steps down or three steps down, x is being used. So x is live at this program point as well. What about this program point? Is x live at this program point? The answer is actually no. It is actually dead because the successive statement is just going to assign a new value to x. So if you are assigning a new value to x, the current value of x is not going to get used. So I don't need to maintain it. I could have thrown it away. And because it's going to get overwritten anyway, so I don't really need to maintain what the current value of x. So this is actually x is dead just before x is colon equal to 4. So I hope you're paying attention. Just before x is colon equal to 4, x is dead. What about just before x is colon equal to 3? Once again, it is dead because the statement just following this particular program point is going to assign to x. And so the current value of x, whatever it was before the statement, is not meaningful anymore to the rest of the program logic. And I don't need to maintain it, so I can call it dead. Maybe I can also take an example. Let's say before this, there was some other thing like a is colon equal to b. What about at this point? Is it dead or live? So once again, it would be dead, okay? Because a is colon equal to b is not going to use x, and x is colon equal to 3 is going to override the value of x. So basically, I'm sure that the current value of x is not going to get used in the program. And so I can call it dead, all right? So this is the lightness analysis for a single variable, x. 

So let's define it more clearly, more precisely. A variable x is live at statement s. If there exists a statement s prime that uses x. Example, s prime could be y equals some function that is using x. For example, y equals x plus z, or y equals a plus b plus x, or whatever, right? So there is some statement in my program which is going to actually use x. And let's call that statement s prime. So for x to be live, there must exist at least one such statement, s prime. Such that it's not just enough for there to exist such a statement. It should also have a particular position. So there should be a path from s to s prime. So there should be some program path that starts at s and then reaches s prime, all right? Even if there is one such program path, that's great, all right? That's good enough. And another thing is that path should have no intervening assignment to x, all right? Because if that path has an intervening assignment to x, it basically means that this use of x is actually for that assignment and not for my current value of x. So this is another important point that there should be no intervening assignment to x. And we also saw this in a previous example. If there was an intervening assignment, even though there was a use later on, because of the assignment, the value is getting overwritten. So the current value is not live. So when we are talking about liveness for a variable, we are actually talking about the liveness for the current value of the variable, right? So that's what we mean, okay? 

So once we define the notion of liveness for a variable by either the value live or dead, we can also talk about dead code from here on. So we recall that we started with the question, can I remove or eliminate this particular statement? In other words, the question was, is the statement dead code? And so this slide formalizes the answer. It is a statement of the form x colon equals something, something. It's dead code if x is dead immediately after the assignment. For example, if there was, just after the assignment, the value is dead, then basically means that whatever the value that's been stored into x is completely meaningless for the rest of the program logic. And that basically means that this particular statement is now dead code and I can eliminate it. So for example, in the example that we saw on the last slide, we had x is colon equal to three, and then x equals colon equal to four. And then just after x colon equal to four, we had live value for x. But just after x is colon equal to three, we had dead value for x, right? And so because the value here is dead, this particular assignment x equal to three is dead. But notice, it's dead code, right? So x being assigned to three is dead code, but x being assigned to value four is not dead code, right, because the value of x is actually live just after the statement. So notice that the emphasis on after and not before. 

All right, okay. So how do we do compute analysis, how do we compute liveness as a DFA? So how do we express a liveness analysis as a DFA? And so the idea is that we are going to express liveness at a program point based on liveness at the successor program point, right? So recall that a data flow analysis is basically about having local rules on how my value should be related to my neighbor's value. So when we were talking about constant propagation, the neighbor was my predecessor neighbor. So I would say, oh, the value at my point, just before this statement, depends on the value at the out of the predecessor. The value at the in of the current statement depends on the values of the out points of the predecessors. But now in this case of liveness, it's going to be a backward data flow analysis. So in a backward data flow analysis, the value at the out of a statement will depend on the values at the in of the successors, all right? So the values at the in of the successors will basically determine the value at the out of the predecessor. So the data is actually flowing in the reverse direction of program execution and that's why it's called backward data flow analysis. So unlike the constant propagation analysis, which was a forward data flow analysis because there the data was flowing in the same direction as the program execution, all right? Okay, so important point that liveness is actually a backward data flow analysis. Recall that in constant propagation, the out of a statement was related to the in of that statement based on what the statement is. In the backward data flow analysis, we will just switch this and here the in of the statement would be related to the out of the statement. It basically means the same thing. I mean, basically these are equations. Recall that these are systems of equations but just as the data, the values are going to flow in the reverse direction because it's the successor's value that I care about when I'm going to determine my own value, not my predecessor's value, all right? We're going to see this with an example later on. So we're going to maintain a Boolean property for a variable and the way property is going to be true if the variable may be live, all right? So and it's going to be false if it is definitely dead, all right? So we have to maintain two properties, whether it's live or whether it's dead but actually I'm making a more subtle point here. I'm not going to store whether it's live or dead. Recall that in a data flow analysis, we basically store the property of interest and then there is a conservative value. We say, okay, I don't really know whether it is that property or not, whether it is X or not. So in this case, I'm proposing that we'll have two properties. One is true, which will stand for it may be live and then false which says, oh, it's definitely not live or definitely dead, all right? So definitely dead means not live, not live for sure. So what is the conservative value here, all right? The conservative value here is actually true, all right? So this is the conservative value. Why? Because it's basically saying, oh, I can't really say that it's definitely dead. It may be live. I can't even say whether it's definitely live or not. I just say it's maybe live, all right? So that's the conservative value and recall that in the case of constant propagation, the conservative value is bottom, which said that, okay, I really can't say whether it's a constant. Similarly here, the conservative value is true, which is saying it may be live. I really can't say that it's definitely dead, all right? So that's what the conservative value is because that's the safe option here, all right? And for example, one way to check whether it's a safe option or not, if I basically, my data flow analysis just returns that everywhere it is the conservative value, which is it may be live, then basically nothing is dead code, right? Because there's no way that I can do dead code elimination from because of that. But only if there are some places where actually I get the false value after my DFA, then I could have some chance of actually identifying dead code and eliminating it. 

So what is the ordering of likeness values? Well, it is, from now on, whenever we talk about a DFA, a data flow analysis, we'll talk about its values, and then we'll talk about the ordering relation between those values, because the ordering relation will help us easily express what should be the transfer function rules, all right? Recall that in constant propagation, four rules could be expressed by just one rule once we had the ordering relation. So we're going to now use the same trick everywhere, and that also helps us ensure that our data flow analysis is well-formed in the sense that it will converge when it executes, right? So these ordering relations are actually very important from not just the ease of specifying the DFA, but also to prove properties of the DFA, things like convergence. So here is the ordering. I'm just going to say that true is less than false, all right? So in this method of representing the two values, true and false, I'm going to say true is less than false, and another way to represent it is to have a directed edge from false to true. So notice that, one way to remember this is that whatever is the direction of the arrow, you can just look at the arrow and kind of treat that as a less than operator. So this diagram is basically saying true is less than false, less than equal to false, to be more precise, all right? And then once we have this ordering, we can also define the greatest lower bound, and that is for X and Y, what is the greatest lower bound? Well, there's just two values, false and true. So greatest lower bound is very easy. It's just the Boolean or, all right? I mean, what is the greatest lower? So you can draw a truth table and say what is the greatest lower bound of, if X is false and Y is false, then it will be false. If X is true and Y is false, or vice versa, then it will be true. And if both are true, then it will be true. And from that truth table, you can just easily infer that this GLB function is just exactly identical to the Boolean or function, right? And so the GLB of, in fact, you can also prove that GLB of any n inputs, and it's easy to see that for X1 dot dot Xn is also equivalent to the logical or function for all these n inputs.
