Title: Compiler Design Module 47 : Activations
Video ID: XYHevw2EGlQ
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

So now we're going to start talking about code generation and the goals of code generation. And the two kind of obvious goals of code generation are correctness, which means that the generated code actually is faithful to the semantics of the program, to the meaning of the program. And the second goal is speed. So I want to make the implementation as fast as possible. Now I would like to point out here that it's easy to basically have a correct implementation but that's an implementation that's not very efficient. On the other hand, it's also very easy to have a very efficient implementation that's not correct. But getting both of these together is actually a tough problem. It's a hard problem. And that's why optimization is a very big compiler design problem. The optimizer is by far the largest fraction of the complexity of a compiler. So before we talk about how it could potentially generate code and what are the constructs that allow such code generation to happen, we need to basically clarify the assumptions we are making on the programming model. So one of the big assumptions that we're making here is that the programming model has sequential execution. So what do I mean by when I say a programming model? A programming model is associated with the language in which the program has been written. So for example, the C programming language has a sequential execution model. So things are just moving one after another. On the other hand, there may be programming languages that allow two or more things to happen in parallel. In a language like C, this can be achieved using libraries like thread libraries and things like that. But then there are some other languages, for example, Java is an example of a language where threads are maybe a part of the language. And so for example, the synchronized keyword in Java is sensitive to the fact that there could be multiple threads that are executing and accessing the same code or same data simultaneously. In fact, even C has notions of concurrency built into it. But we are only going to restrict ourselves to the sequential execution model, which is by far the most common programming model. Even languages that support non-sequential models like concurrent models and things like that, a large part of their language is actually sequential and only a small part is concurrent. And it needs to be explicitly specified in those cases. We're going to talk about only sequential execution because it simplifies our discussion. Later on, we will talk about a little bit of how concurrency may be dealt with in such a scenario. Further, we are going to assume procedure call return semantics in the sense that when you make a procedure call, then the procedure executes while the... So let's say a caller makes a call to a callee, then the callee executes and the caller waits until the callee finishes execution. And only when the callee finishes execution, the caller resumes. Also when the callee finishes execution, the caller resumes exactly at the point just after the call. Right? So these are the standard procedure call return semantics that we take for granted. But it is important to know that these semantics are just part of our programming model assumptions. In fact, there are some exceptions to such semantics. For example, there is the throw-catch mechanism for exceptions in many languages, including and Java, where an exception may be thrown somewhere. And so the control flow may need not necessarily be sequential anymore. And the control may suddenly switch to the caller of the caller of the caller because an exception is supposed to unroll the stack until the first catch block is encountered or until no catch block is encountered, in which case the exception terminates the program and shows this message to the programmer or to the user. So we are not really going to talk about these kind of semantics and how to generate code for them. Maybe we'll touch them a little bit later on. But we're going to focus primarily on sequential execution. Also there are some other programming models. For example, call cc, which means call with current continuation. So in this programming model, unlike the regular procedure call where after the procedure call finishes, it's supposed to return back to the caller in a call with current continuation. The caller is supposed to also pass a continuation object to the caller. The idea is when the callee finishes, it is supposed to use the continuation object to resume execution. And that continuation object may or may not correspond to the caller just after the function call. So if it corresponds to the caller just after the function call, it starts looking like a normal function call, normal procedure call that you're familiar with. But if it is something else, then it can execute something else after that. If you recall, we used function objects in some in our discussion on recursive descent passing, and that can be thought of as a continuation passing mechanism. All right. OK, so one of the most basic and most very important abstractions, programming abstractions, is the notion of a procedure or a function call. And so we're going to deal with it especially. And we're going to define this new term called activations. So what is an activation? An activation is an invocation of a procedure P. So an invocation of a procedure P is also called an activation of P. And there could be multiple invocations of the same procedure P. So there could be multiple activations of the same procedure P. And then there is an associated notion with activation, which is what is the lifetime of that activation? So let's understand what's the lifetime of an activation. Lifetime of an activation of a procedure P is all the steps that, you know, so by lifetime, I mean, what is the time for which this procedure P's activation was active? And so that is basically for all the steps in P's executions, whatever is the body of P, whatever it executes, that's going to be a part of the lifetime of an activation of P. And it will also include all the steps in the procedure that P calls. So if P calls some other procedures, then whatever is the lifetime of those procedures also gets included in the lifetime of the current activation of P that we are currently considering. OK. So fairly intuitive and standard definition of lifetime and activation. Just like we talk about lifetime of an activation of a procedure P, we can also talk about the lifetime of a variable in the program, right? So just like, so what is a variable? A variable is just a storage memory space, represents a storage memory space which has a name so that the programmer can refer to it. And so the lifetime of a variable is the portion of execution in which X is defined, right? So it's possible that X is defined only for some portion of the execution, especially true for local variables. And so the lifetime of a local variable would just be that portion of the execution where there was a definition of that particular variable X. It's important to note here that lifetime is not equal to scope. So I'm asking this question, is lifetime equal to scope? And the answer is no, all right? Lifetime is a dynamic runtime concept, while scope is a static concept. So for example, the same local variable may be instantiated 100 times, in which case there will be 100 different instances of a variable, and each of those instances could have a different lifetime. So lifetime is associated with dynamic runtime quantities, whereas scope is associated with static abstract syntax tree, the quantities that are present in the static compile time abstract syntax tree. It has nothing to do with the runtime notion. So for example, many simultaneous runtime instances of the same procedure or variable are possible. We just discussed, so we'll talk about lifetimes of each of those different instances, whereas scope is only for the variable name, as it exists only once in the abstract syntax tree. Further, lifetimes can often cross scope boundaries. So for example, maybe it is not a local variable, or maybe it is a local variable, or maybe it's a variable that was mallogged. And in which case, the lifetime of a variable will be basically much big, it's kind of dynamic and depends on the runtime, and has nothing to do with the static scoping system. So lifetime is associated with runtime quantity. So even for example, something that was mallogged, we would talk about the lifetime of that quantity, whereas scope is only meant for static compile time program syntax features. All right, so one of the important observations when we talk about procedure calls, as we just discussed, are that lifetimes of the activations of procedures are nested for a caller-callee relationship. So let's say P is a procedure, and it calls another procedure Q. So P is the caller and Q is the callee. Now, based on our semantics, we know that when P calls Q, then Q returns before P returns, right? Because Q is going to return only then P is going to return. Because until Q returns, P is going to wait. And so the lifetime of Q is contained within the lifetime of P. And that's represented by this figure. If the orange line is the lifetime of P, then the blue line is the lifetime of Q, which is properly contained in the lifetime of P. And when I say lifetime of P, I'm really talking about lifetime of P's activation, and lifetime of Q's activation. I'm talking about one instance or one invocation or one activation of P and Q. And so the lifetime of one invocation or one activation of P contains the lifetime of the corresponding activation of Q, all right? So let's take an example. Let's say this is my C program that has three different functions, definitions. One is the function G that always returns one. The other is function F that calls G and returns its return value. So it just says the body is returned G. And then int main, which is the main function, it returns G plus F. So basically, this program really doesn't mean anything, but we want to just use it to understand the notion of lifetimes and activations. So here is how I would represent the activations of this. Here's one way to represent the activations of this program. So the first activation is for the procedure main. So that's represented by this node main. And then I basically represent activations as a tree where this edge is drawn if one of the activations is contained within the other's activation. So my first observation here is actually there are two different activations of G, all right? So although it's just one procedure G, it's actually two different activations of G because it is called twice in this program. Recall again that activation is a runtime concept and lifetime is a runtime concept. So G is called first by main directly. And the second time, it's called by F, which is again called by main, all right? So there are two different activations of G. The first activation of G is contained within main. Similarly, the activation of F is contained within main. And the activation of G is contained within F. And so I can now use this relation, which is, is the activations lifetime contained within the other's activation lifetime or not? And if I draw edges of the sword, then I'm going to end up with a tree because that's how the program is going to work. It's going to only, I mean, so if you draw an edge between from, if A's lifetime is contained within B's lifetime, then you draw edge from B to A. And so what you're going to end up with is a tree of this sort, as it's shown in this example. And so we are also going to sometimes use a tree to represent the activation lifetimes, just like in this example. Notice that this activation tree shows the nesting behavior, all right? That's because that's what the edges represent. It represents that the activation of one is nested in the activation of the other. Here's another activation tree example, slightly more interesting example, where we say int main and it says return F3, it calls F on three. And F is a function that takes input integer and it's a recursive function. It calls itself until X is zero, in which case it calls G, all right? And so if I look at the activation tree for this program, notice that there will be multiple instances of F, each time with a different argument. And so when we talk about activations, we are also talking about not just the procedure name and the body, but also what are the arguments with which it was called. And so in this case, it's main, the main activation is contains or F3, which contains F2, which contains F1, which contains F0, which contains G. And so this particular chain actually represents our activation tree. In general, it could be a tree, but in this case, it happens to be just a linear chain. Okay, so that's the notion of an activation tree, but then there's also the notion of active activations, which means what are the activations that are currently active or that are currently whose lifetime has neither been, so it has been started, but not ended yet, right? So for example, when the program just starts, the only current activation is main, then maybe it calls G, at which point the two active activations are main and G. Then again, G returns, and so the only activation is main again. And then it calls F, so now the currently active activations are main and F. Similarly, main and F and G, when F calls G. And then G returns, so it becomes main and F and finally it's main, and then main exits, in which case all the activations are finished, we assume. All right, so in this, so that's the idea of currently active activations. And once again, if the activations are currently active, then it must be true that some of those activations are nested in the other activations, as you can see in this particular example as well. So because activations, the active activations are properly nested, a stack can trace the currently active activations. So for example, when G is running, then the currently active activations are main and G, and so I can use a stack to track both main and G. So in this, so we can use a stack, and a stack, notice that it only keeps track of the currently active activations. It doesn't keep track of all the entire activation tree, which will also include all the inactive activations. All right, so now if we look at our memory layout that we had looked at in our last lecture module, we said that there is some code and there is some other space, which is the data space, and some of that space will be used to store the stack. Maybe that stack is at one end of the other area. Typically the stack grows downwards. This is just a convention that hardware machines also use. So we're also going to assume that the stack grows from higher addresses to lower addresses. So the stack is growing downwards. And what is the stack? This is the stack of currently active activations. And the reason we arrived at a stack is because of these features of a procedure called semantics that activations are properly nested.
