Title: Compiler Design Module 124 8: Aliasing and Pointer Analysis
Video ID: SYsKGmDK4qk
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

In the next few lecture modules, I'm gonna discuss an important topic called memory objects and pointers and how to deal with them. And this is one of the most consequential things about compiler optimizations when we do compiler optimizations on imperative languages, which involve memory allocations like C, C++, Java, et cetera. So memory objects and pointers. So let's say we declare a variable in C, like int x. Then what we are actually doing is we are allocating memory. And this memory starts at some address, let's say adder, and goes up to some size, depends on this type. Let's assume that the size of an integer on a particular machine is four bytes. Then this region, memory region, is from adder to adder plus four, where adder plus four is not included. So four bytes, adder, adder plus one, adder plus two, and adder plus three. And the address of x is pointing to the beginning of this region, which means the address of x and adder are the same value. Similarly, so this region of memory is also called an object. So any region of memory is also called an object. Similarly, if I allocate a variable using the new construct in these languages like C, C++, Java, which basically allows dynamic allocation, then it returns a pointer p to an object of type x. So if the type x is of size of x, then we have allocated a new memory object from some address adder till some end address, adder plus size of x. And the pointer p, the return value, is now pointing to the beginning of this adder. So p and adder are the same value. So this is the common memory allocation that we are aware of. I just want to point out that when we say an object, it does not need to be a contiguous region of memory. It could be made up of discontinuous regions of memory as well. For example, when I do new x, and if x was a compound type, for example, it was a class or a struct, then p may point to the root node that represents that struct, that memory object, and that may have pointers of its own. And collectively, all these memory regions will be called a single object, right? So that's what the terminology is. An object is nothing but a region or a set of regions of memory. Now, when we talk about a region of memory, then we also talk about aliasing of those regions. So for example, let x represent an object of four bytes, starting from adder to adder plus four. And let star p represent an object of one byte. So p is pointing to this location here. So in other words, when I say x represents an object of four bytes, I'm actually saying that ampersand, I'm actually saying that ampersand x points to this location. And so when I say x represents an object of four bytes, it basically means ampersand x is pointing to an object x. And the x, object x itself is the actual region of memory. Similarly, p is pointing to a region or an object, and the actual object is star p, which is basically representing, or char star p to represent the size of that region. And that region is basically represented by this one byte here. And notice that in this case, char star p and x alias. Why do we say that they're alias? Because the regions of memory that they occupy are overlapping. And this is true for both discontinuous and contiguous objects. Two objects are alias if the regions of memory represented by the two objects are, the intersection of them is non-empty or they're overlapping. In this example, star p and x alias. Now, so let's define what aliasing means. Two or more names for the same region of memory. That's what we mean by aliasing. So in this example, the region, this region of memory, this one byte here has two names. One is the name which is given, derived from the variable x. For example, you could say ampersand x plus one and treat it as a character pointer and then, you know, dereference it. And that would be one name for this region and another name would be star p. So aliasing basically means two or more names for the same region of memory. And in this example, star p and x alias, if and only if the memory regions named by them overlap. And that's what we mean when we say that two objects overlap. Now, there's an important terminology subtlety here that I want to be very explicit about. We talk about aliasing of objects, not pointers. So notice that we say that star p1 aliases with star p2. For example, star p aliases with x. We don't say p aliases with ampersand x. So if pointers p1 and p2 point to the same object, then we say that the values star p1 and star p2 which represents the object alias. Notice that when we use star p1, we also encode the size of that object because p1 is just an address. But when we say star p1, depending on the type of p1, star p1 represents not just an address, but also a size. And so star p1 can encode more information. Similarly, star p2 is also a region which includes both the starting address and the size. And if it's a discontinuous object, then all the regions that are pointed to by that particular object. And the two objects alias, if the regions basically overlap. And this is an important and subtle terminology quirk that we should always remember because it's a common mistake to start talking about aliasing of pointers and not of objects. And I want to make this clear that whenever we say aliasing, we're talking about aliasing of objects. Okay, so let's take an example. So let's say I have a program x equals new, some capital X. I set up field of x to let's say a value 42. I read y equals x.f and then I assert whether y is equal to 42 or not. Now in this example, it is indeed true and you can use a standard data flow analysis to confirm that this assertion will always be true, which means y will always be equal to 42. However, let's take another example where we do x equals new again, we allocate a memory object and x is a pointer to that. And we have some other pointer p, which is some complicated function on x and or maybe the address of x. And eventually it is possible that p actually may be the start, the value pointed to by star p can alias with the value represented by star x. So let's say I do x.f equals 42 and then I do p.f equals zero and then I do y equals x.f. Now, is it okay to assert y equals 42? The answer is no, because we are not sure whether y is definitely equal to 42 or maybe it has become zero because if star p was aliasing with star x, then it could have become zero. But if it was not aliasing with star p was not aliasing with star x, then this would have been 42. And so because of aliasing, many compiler analysis that would have been otherwise straightforward become more complicated because you have to make the conservative assumption in this example. I will make the conservative assumption that star p may alias with star x, in which case it's not true that y equals 42. For example, if I was doing a constant propagation analysis, then while in this example, it's okay to replace all subsequent uses of y with 42. In this example, it is not okay to do that because we have not been able to reason about the fact that star p and star x do not alias. For this reason, it is very important for a compiler to do some kind of alias analysis to identify in a best effort way as many non-alias relationships as possible. For example, a compiler, a good compiler, a robust compiler should be able to say that star p will never alias with star x if that is indeed true about the program. And this space is, this comes under the white space of what's called pointer analysis within a compiler. So in this example, p.f and x.f may alias. And for this reason, it's not okay to assert y equals 42 here and it's not okay to do constant propagation optimization in this example. Let's take another example. Let's say in this example, p was directly assigned to x. And now I do x.f equals 42 and then I do p.f equals zero. And then I do y equals x.f. Now, is it okay to assert that y equals zero? The answer is yes, because here we are sure that p and x point to the same object. In other words, star p and star x are definitely aliasing and they're fully overlapping. They actually represent the same object. And hence, when you do p.f equals zero, you're actually also doing x.f equals zero. And so when you read x.f into y, you're sure that you're going to get the value zero. So in this example, once again, if the compiler to be able to reason that y equals zero, let's say for constant propagation, it needs this information that star p or p.f and x.f are definitely aliasing objects. In other words, p.f and x.f must alias. And this is a must alias relationship between the objects star p and star x, or p.f and x.f. All right, so we have discussed two types of analysis so far. One is may alias, which is whether two objects, let's say star p and star x, can they potentially alias, which we call may alias? And the other is, will they definitely alias, which we call must alias? In both cases, whether it is may alias or must alias, the problem of identifying whether two pointers or two objects definitely alias is undecidable. Similarly, it's undecidable to say that the two objects definitely do not alias, because that's the may alias analysis. And so both of these problems are undecidable in general, and we can only hope for a best effort analysis. In a best effort analysis, you allow spurious may alias pairs. For example, it's always safe to say that two things may alias. If you don't want to, you're not sure, you can always safely say that, yes, star x and star y may alias, or x and y may alias or whatever. And for example, if your program contains two new statements, x equals new capital X and y equals new capital X, then here it's very clear that star x and star y do not alias, because they are two separate memory allocations. And the semantics of the programming language ensure that the second memory allocation cannot overlap with the first memory allocation. But maybe your may alias analysis is not so precise, in which case it's okay for the star x comma star y pair to belong to the may alias set. So it is okay for spurious pairs, for example, star x and star y, to belong to your may alias set through your alias analysis. However, an analysis is sound if there are no, if two things may alias, then it should always belong to the may alias set. So any things that may alias must belong to the may alias set, but any things that may not alias may also belong to the may alias set. And that's what it means to say that it is imprecise, but sound. An unsound analysis would incorrectly say that two things may not alias, even though at runtime they may alias. So a sound analysis captures all the possible may alias relationships, but it may have some more, and some more spurious may alias relationship. Similarly, a sound must alias analysis may miss some of the must alias relationships, but whatever it captures are definitely must alias. So for example, if I say x equals new x and y equals x, we are clear that star y and star x must alias. However, maybe because your analysis is imprecise, star x and star y may not belong to the must alias set that you computed, which is okay, which is still sound, but imprecise. An unsound analysis would have had wrong entries into the must alias set. So a sound may alias analysis may have extra pairs, which may not have alias, but it should capture all the pairs that actually may alias. A must alias analysis may leave out some pairs that must alias, but whatever it captures should actually alias at runtime for sure. And so for example, a trivial solution for a may alias analysis could be that everything may alias with everything else. A trivial solution for a must alias analysis could be that nothing must alias with anything else. And both of these solutions are sound solutions, but they are completely useless solutions. They're completely imprecise solutions. In any case, we are interested in finding a sound solution. So we're not going to compromise soundness in a compiler, because if the solution is unsound, then the compiler can produce wrong optimizations. But we cannot hope for a fully precise analysis because the problem is undecidable. But we want to have as high precision as possible. What is, how is precision defined? Well, in the case of may alias, we want to minimize this number of spurious pairs that we identify as may aliasing. And in the case of must alias, we want to minimize the number of missing pairs in the must alias set. Usually, this is a common trade-off in compilers where there's a trade-off between running time and precision. If you want a fast, imprecise analysis, then you get low running time and low precision. There are algorithms that will give you low precision and low running time. They're fast and imprecise. If your application cares a lot about precision and can have the budget of a longer runtime, then you can have a high running time and high precision. That's a slow and more precise analysis. So here's an example that this demonstrates the value or the importance of such alias or pointer analysis. You may be familiar with the memcpy function in the C library, which basically takes two pointers, the destination pointer and the source pointer and a size n. And it copies n bytes or n characters starting from source into dest. And so, for example, it copies source to source plus n to dest to dest plus n. This is a rough pseudocode that shows what it does. However, what if source and dest, these regions, source to source plus n and dest to dest plus n overlap or alias? In that case, some of the optimizations that were possible in this implementation of this function would become incorrect. So first of all, I want to say that the memcpy function is one of the most common and performance critical functions that is used in the software system stack. This implementation that I've shown you here is the most basic implementation that you could possibly have for memcpy. But the actual implementations are typically an order of hundreds of lines of code where you do vectorization, you do all kinds of special code generation for special cases and so on. So imagine if source and destination could have overlap or alias, then vectorization, which copies four or eight bytes in one go from source to destination may become incorrect because now when you copy four bytes in a chunk, maybe some of those bytes were actually belonging to the dest and so on. And in fact, because this function is so important and because so many libraries use this function, just because of this corner case situation where the two regions overlap, we don't want to end up with a slow implementation. And for this reason, the designers of this C library basically state that this function should only be called for regions that do not overlap. The source and dest regions should not overlap. In other words, it's undefined behavior to call this function with inputs such that these regions dest to dest plus n and source to source plus n alias. And this example shows the importance of aliasing and how aliasing pervades the system stack, not just within a compiler, but also when we're doing library design. Here's another example that's more compiler-like. So let's say I have a program that accumulates the content, the values in an array A into a variable sum. And so it says for i equals zero to n i++, you just do star sum plus equals ai. Now it's possible to make this very fast by faster than this naive implementation by, for example, register allocating star sum and then writing it at the very end, vectorizing this loop by doing, by taking eight, reading eight values from the memory in one go and then summing them using a vector instruction and so on. But all that is not possible to do unless we are sure that star sum cannot alias with some location in A. In the absence of other information, a compiler is conservatively forced to make the conservative assumption that star sum may alias with ai and all these optimizations, including register allocation and vectorization are illegal if star sum may alias with ai. So this also is an example that shows how much difference may alias information, good may alias information can make to compiler optimization. So here are some basic rules for may aliasing. If there are two separate variables, x and y, that have been declared in your C program, for example, then you know that the regions represented by x and y definitely do not alias because they are two separate variables and by language semantics, the two separate declarations will be given to two different objects or regions of memory. Similarly, if there are two separate allocations, for example, x equals new something or y equals new and y equals new something, then star x and star y must not alias. In other words, star x and star y does not belong to may alias. And these are the kind of rules or transfer functions that can be used to develop such a pointer analysis. We are going to discuss how such pointer analysis are implemented in the subsequent modules. This is just a very basic introduction on how this is done. So one way of identifying what objects may or may not alias is using a points to information. What is points to information? We want to figure out what are the memory objects that a pointer P may point to. For example, P1 may point to a bunch, possibly point to one of the objects, O1, O2, dot, dot, dot, O, K1, and maybe another pointer P2 may point to one of the objects, Q1, Q2, dot, dot, dot, Q, K2. Now, this information is obtained using a points to analysis. For example, if in your program, we have a statement like P equals ampersand x, then we know that P may point to the object x. Further, if we have another statement that says x equals ampersand y, then we know that x may point to y. And overall, this is what the points relationship looks like. P may point to x, and x in turn may point to y. In other words, these objects O1, O2, et cetera, can also be the LHS of this points to relationship. So for example, just like P1 can point to O1, et cetera, et cetera, O1 may point to another set of objects, R1, R2, R3, et cetera. And of course, these sets of objects that these pointers may point to may overlap, or may intersect, may have a non-empty intersection. One way of approximating the may alias information, so may alias is one of the more important kind of information that a compiler needs to be able to perform transformations. That's just like we saw in a couple of examples that we saw, like memcpy or the accumulate functions. And one way that is typically used in compilers is to first compute the points to information. For each pointer, identify all the objects that that pointer may point to. Similarly, so for example, you identify that P1 may point to all these objects, and we call that the points to function, that's encoded to the points to function, it says points to of P1. Similarly, this represents points to of P2. And we say that star P1 and star P2 may alias, if and only if the intersection of the two points to sets of P1 and P2 is non-empty. And this is just one way of approximating the may alias information. And this is a sound approximation of may alias information. Assuming that the points to set is sound, which means that this set includes all the objects that P1 may potentially point to, then this definition of a may alias set is also sound, which means that anything that is left out in the may alias set will definitely not alias, because the only things we leave out in the may alias set are things that point to distinct objects, whose the set of objects of the two points to sets are non-overlapping. And only then we say that they don't alias, in which case we are sure that the two objects cannot alias. So this is one way of approximating may alias that two objects may alias if and only if their points to sets intersect.
