Title: Compiler Design Module 33 : SLR Examples
Video ID: oeiJSAFbGIs
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

So now we're going to look at a couple of examples to see how the SLR algorithm works and see it in action. So let's consider this particular grammar. We are familiar with this grammar because we looked at this grammar when we were discussing left recursion in the context of recursive descent parsing. So this grammar basically has two productions. S produces S A and S produces B. And basically this grammar produces strings of the type B followed by any number of As. And the SLR algorithm or in general any LR algorithm should be able to parse it, assuming that it doesn't have conflicts of the type shift reduce or reduce reduce. And in other words, the LR algorithm, bottom up parsing algorithms, shift reduce parsing algorithms do not have any problem with left recursion. And they can easily handle it because they are dealing with the rightmost derivation. So the first step in being able to parse this using the SLR algorithm is to add another production. S prime produces S and our new start non terminal is going to be S prime instead of S. Now I'm going to show you how this works, how this algorithm is going to work by just constructing the DFA of viable prefixes. The DFA that's meant to recognize the viable prefixes. Now the first state of the DFA is going to be formed by the epsilon closure of the first item S prime produces dot S. So what's the epsilon closure of S prime produces dot S? Well, it's all the productions, all the items that have S in the LHS. So S produces dot SA and S produces dot B. And this epsilon closure of S prime producing dot S forms our first initial DFA state. So this forms our initial DFA state. Now if I consume, if I see a terminal B when I'm in this state, then I'm going to transition and I'm going to transition such that I'm going to move the dot after B. And so the only production that can actually consume a B is the third one. And so I end up in a state which has only one item S produces B dot. Similarly, if I'm in the initial state and I consume capital S in the non-terminal S, then the DFA transitions to a state that has two items. S prime produces S dot and S produces S dot A. They're just formed by moving the dot across the S in the first two productions. The third production cannot consume an S. So that's the three states of my DFA. Now let's continue the same procedure. So maybe in this particular state, I can consume an A to get S produces SA dot. And at this point, I have pretty much completed the DFA construction. So this represents the DFA. And once again, this is my start state. And I can run any prefix tag on this DFA to figure out whether it is a viable prefix or not. Also, by running the stack on this DFA to figure out whether I can also look at what is the state that I arrive at. And depending on the state, I can decide whether to shift or reduce. Now in most of these states, it's very clear what to do. For example, if I'm in this state, the initial state, then the only option is to shift. Because dot is not appearing at the end of any production. Similarly, if I'm here, S producing B dot, then I must reduce. That's the only option. There's no ambiguity. There's no conflict. Similarly, if I'm in this state, then the only option is to reduce. However, if I'm in this particular state, then I have two options. Either I could reduce S to an S' or I could shift the next terminal and I expect it to be an A. So this particular state represents a shift-reduce conflict in my automaton of items. More precisely, this is the automaton of LR0 items because these items are called LR0 items. They don't have any look ahead as opposed to LR1 items. And so this particular state, if I end up in this particular state, I have a shift-reduce conflict. I don't know whether to shift or reduce. I could either reduce to S' or I could shift the next terminal token A. Now, an LR0 algorithm would not be able to parse this particular grammar because of exactly this reason. Because it doesn't know whether to shift or reduce. But an SLR algorithm is an improvement over LR0. And what is the improvement? I have one look ahead and I'm going to look at that look ahead token and decide whether to shift or reduce. What is the heuristic that I'm going to use? Well, if my next look ahead token is the token that matches one of the items, one of the next characters in the items. For example, if it's an A, then I should shift. And also if I'm reducing, then if the next item is in the follow set of the LHS. So whatever is in the follow set of S', I should consider. And if the next token in my input stream is in the follow set of S', then I should reduce. Now, let's look at what is the follow set of S'. Well, if I look at the grammar, then I can easily see that the follow set of S' is only the end of input marker, which is the dollar. Because nothing can follow S'. S' is the top high level non-terminal that is not appearing in the RHS of any other production. So the only thing that follows S' is dollar. On the other hand, this particular shift requires an A. And so we have a resolution. So if the next look ahead token is an A, then I should shift. If the next look ahead token is a dollar, which is the only terminal in the follow set of S', then I should reduce. So if the look ahead is dollar, then I should reduce. And if it's an A, then I should shift. And so I've been able to resolve this conflict in my SLR algorithm, although this conflict was not resolvable in the LR0 algorithm. And for this reason, I'm going to say that this is not an LR0 grammar. But I'm going to say that this is an SLR grammar because it can be passed using SLR. Recall that any SLR grammar is also an LALR1 grammar and is also an LR1 grammar. OK, let's take another example. In this case, it's a similar grammar, except that I have replaced this production S producing SA with S producing SAS. So it's slightly more complicated, but it's going to serve our purpose of exposition. And it's not really clear what kind of strings it accepts. Unlike the previous grammar where it was very clear that it's B followed by some number of As, it's a little bit more complicated. And we are not interested in that. But we are interested in whether this is passable and how do we figure this out and whether it's passable using SLR. So once again, we're going to construct the automaton, the DFA, to try and identify viable prefixes of this grammar. Once again, the first step here is to just add this production S prime produces S and make S prime as our new start symbol. And so because S prime is our new start symbol, the first state of my DFA is going to be S prime produces dot S. That's the LR0 item. And then it's epsilon closure. So any production that starts with S that has S on the LHS and then dot is on the leftmost position in the LHS. The epsilon closure. Alright, so this is the DFA state and this is the initial state of the DFA. Now, with this DFA state, I could either consume capital S or I could consume small b. And so let's see, if I consume small b, then I transition to this state, which has only one item S produces B dot. It is similar to what we had in my previous grammar. But let's say I consume capital S, then I get to this state, which has S prime produces capital S dot. And S prime S produces capital S dot small a capital S. So based on the first two productions here, first two items here, I could consume an S and move the dot in both those items. Now continuing this, I could consume an a and I could reach S produces S a dot S. And because now the dot is positioned right before a non-terminal, I need to also include its epsilon closure. So the epsilon closure is going to be capital S in all productions with S in the LHS and dot in the leftmost position of the LHS. So S produces dot S a S and S produces dot b. These two form the epsilon closure of the first one. So similarly, if I get a b here, then I'm going to transition back to this state, because the first two items are not going to be meaningful for b, but the last one is. And I'm going to end up in this state. And if I get an S, then I'm going to transition to this particular state. So I can move the dot one step to the right to obtain this one. And I can move the dot one step to the right to obtain this one. This is my state. And once again, if I'm in this state, I could potentially consume an a. And I would be back in this particular state, because if I consume an a, I would be at S a dot S. And that's the first production here. And then it's epsilon closure, which is these two. And at this point, I think we have completed our DFA to recognize the viable prefixes. And this represents our start state of the DFA. Now the question is, is this DFA, from this DFA, can we say whether this grammar is SLR or not? Now let's look at each of the states of the DFA. So in this particular state, there is no problem. We can only shift. There is no reduction possible. In this particular state, there is only a reduction possible. And we know what reduction to use. It's just S producing B. In this particular state, I have a problem, because it's both a reduction possible because of the first item and a shift possible because of the second item. So I have a problem in this one. Let's look at this one. In this particular state, I only have a shift possible. I could either shift in all the three items. So there's only shift. And in this particular state, once again, I have a problem. I could either reduce or shift because I have one item which has dot to the rightmost side at the rightmost position and one in which it is not at the rightmost position. So basically, I have shift reduce conflicts in two of the states. And I don't really have any reduce reduce conflicts in this grammar. So clearly, it has shift reduce conflicts. So it is not an LR0 grammar because an LR0 grammar shouldn't have had any shift reduce conflicts or reduce reduce conflicts in this particular automaton. However, SLR is an improvement over LR0 and uses the lookahead. So let's see whether the lookahead is going to help us. So in this particular state, I need to decide whether to shift or to reduce. And it's very clear that if the next token is an A, then I should shift. And if the next token is in the follow of S prime, then I should reduce. And once again, what is the follow of S prime? Follow of S prime is just dollar. So follow of S prime is just dollar because that's the only terminal that can follow S prime. Let's also look at what's follow of S. Well, follow of S is actually what can follow S? A can follow S. And in fact, dollar can follow S because anything that can follow S prime can also follow S. So A and dollar can follow S. So now, once again, if I look at this particular state, then if the next lookahead is in follow of S prime, which means if the next lookahead is a dollar, then I'm going to reduce. If the next lookahead is A, then I'm going to shift. So once again, I've been able to resolve this particular shift reduce conflict. It's easy. If the next lookahead is a dollar, then I'm going to reduce. If the next lookahead is an A, then I'm going to shift. Now let's look at this state. In this state, I'm reducing SAS to S. And I'm shifting A in S.AS. Now here, I would reduce if the next lookahead is in the follow of S. And I would shift if the next lookahead is in A. Now let's look at the follow of S. The follow of S has both A and a dollar. And now I don't have a resolution because if my next lookahead is in A, I don't know whether to shift or reduce. Because if the next lookahead is in A, then I could have either reduced because A is in the follow of S or shifted because of this second item. And so I don't have a resolution. And even in an SLR grammar, I have a conflict. I don't know whether to shift or reduce. And so there's a lookahead A for both shift and reduce. And this grammar is hence not an SLR grammar.
