Title: Compiler Design Module 83 : Liveness DFA Example
Video ID: dTVq4gnbUYg
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

So now we're going to discuss an example to show the liveness dataflow analysis algorithm in action. So consider this example. So it's a very simple example, where a variable x is initialized to 0. We have a loop, let's say it's a while loop, let's say while x is not equal to 10, x is colon equal to x plus 1. And then we just return. Notice that I'm not returning x or anything like that, I'm just returning. So in other words, the value of x is not being used at the end of the program. Now the question is, what is the liveness status of x in this program at different program points? The first question is what are all the program points? So before we can talk about that, let's represent this program in our IR, intermediate representation, as a control flow graph. Recall that most intermediate representations that generate assembly code are basically control flow graphs. And so here's a control flow graph. This is the entry point. And we have x is colon equal to 0 as the first basic block. Then we have a check which says x is not equal to 10, which forms a separate basic block of its own. Then there's the loop body, which is incrementing x, x is colon equal to x plus 1. And then it's just jumping back to the loop condition, which is and then if the loop condition fails, that's the false branch. Then it just goes to the return statement, which forms a separate basic block. So this particular program is when represented as a control flow graph has four basic blocks. 

And these are all the program points. Once again, all the program points are just before and after every statement. And so in this case, because every statement has its own basic block, every statement is associated with two different program points, one just before it and one just after it. And recall that our initialization condition for the liveness DFA involves setting all the values of L to false. This is the value for the liveness value for x. More precisely, this is L, S, x, in, out. So this is what we are looking at. But in out is basically being captured by these program points and S is also being captured. So I'm just saying that what is the value of x at different program points. And I'm initializing everything to false. Recall that's what our liveness algorithm was. And our question is which program point to pick. And basically we want to pick a program point which does not satisfy one of our DFA rules. And once we pick it, then we are going to update the value such that it starts satisfying it. And recall that liveness is a backward data flow analysis. So we are going to pick a value. If I pick a statement, then I'm going to pick a value at the in of the statement. I'm going to set the in based on the out. So it's generally the upper value that is being represented as a function of the lower value. 

All right, so in this case, which points in the program do not satisfy our liveness rules. Actually, there are multiple points. For example, if I look at this particular statement, x is colon equal to x plus 1. The statement is using x, yet the value at the beginning of the statement is false. And this violates our liveness DFA rule because the liveness DFA rule, if you recall, was that if the statement is using x, then the value of L just before that statement is going to be true. Right? So but this in this case, it's false. And actually the same thing applies here. When I look at x is not equal to 10, here x is being used because it's a comparison. And based on that, this value just before x is not equal to 10 comparison should have been true. So I could have I could pick any of these values as if there are multiple options, recall that the DFA can pick any of these values and it doesn't really matter. So maybe I'll pick this one first, which is x is colon equal to x plus 1. And based on that, I'm going to set the value at the beginning of the statement to true. 

Now, once again, I need to pick a pick a point program point where the rules are not being met. And what is one point where the rules are not being met? Well, here is one point which is just after x is not equal to 10. The value is false. Whereas on least on one of the predecessors, the value is true. And recall that the first rule was that the predecessors value is the logical odd of the values at the successors. And one of the successors is true. The other successor is false. The logical or of true and false is true. And so this value needs to be updated to true. And that's my next step. So I update this value to true. 

Now, I can continue this. And now this is true. X is being used. So this value needs to be set to true as well, just before the comparison x not equal to 10. And that's my third step of the DFA. It sets false to true in this just before. 

And now what? Now, which statement or which program point is not satisfying our live news DFA rules? Well, let's look at this particular program point just after the assignment of x is equal to zero. This is a point and the in of x is not equal to zero is true. If we apply the first rule, this should have been also true because there's only one successor and that value is true, then the logical or of true is just true. And this should have been true, not false. And so I need to update this. Moreover, how many predecessors does this point have? It has this and it has this as a predecessor, right? Because of the loop edge, the one that I'm traversing, this particular place here is also false and this can also become true. And I'll update both these values in one go. So this is true and this is true. 


And at this point, you may find that all the data flow analysis rules are being followed. This remains false because this is an assignment. This remains false because return is not actually looking at x and that's it, right? So all these values have become true, but there are some values that still remain false. So this is the fixed point solution of our live news DFA. 

Some observations on the live news DFA, notice that each value can change only once, right? In constant propagation, we argued that each value can change at most twice. Here, each value can change at most once. Sometimes it may not change at all. And that's because you can start with false and maybe it will go to true and that's it. And those are the only two options. And so what is the convergence guarantee? Well, because each value can only change once and at every step of the DFA iteration, fixed point iteration, at least some value should change. And there are at most two into n values where n is the number of statements in the program. So the DFA algorithm is guaranteed to converge within two into n steps. What is the worst case execution time? Well, as we just discussed, the worst case execution time is when all the values converge with a single value, all the values change and with a single value changing in every step, the worst case execution time would be two into n steps where n is the number of statements in the program. Once the analysis finishes, we have all these values false, true, false, true everywhere. And if there is a statement where the after if there's a statement that is defining x and the value of liveness for x just after that statement is false, then we can eliminate that statement as dead code. So once the analysis finishes, we can use it to identify dead code. And notice that the direction of flow of information for constant propagation was forward while for liveness is backward. Why do I say backward? Because in liveness, it's the upper value that is represented as a function of the lower values. In constant propagation is a lower value that is represented as a function of the upper values. 

Or more precisely, in forward data flow analysis, the direction of the data flow is in the direction of program analysis from top to bottom. In backward data flow analysis, the direction of data flow is against the direction of program execution.
