Title: Compiler Design Module 45 : Recovering from Type Errors
Video ID: D0bsseAJvs4
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

So by now we have learned about typing rules, how to do type checking. Finally, we discussed how to recover from errors when you encounter a typing error. Well, one approach to, one response to observing an error during the type checking phase is to just abort the compilation and tell the user about the first error that you encountered, and that's it. The other approach could be that you try to ignore the error that you have found. You report it to the user, but you ignore it, and you try to move on to find more errors so that you can report multiple errors in one go to the programmer. Now, here is an example. So let's say we, in our programming language, we have a type called string, and we have a type called int. And let's say somebody tries to add a string to an int. So maybe he does x plus y, and x was a string, and y was an int. And that would be a perfectly valid context-free, that would obey the context-free grammar rules. It may also obey the scoping rules, but it fails the type rules. And that would be an error. So how do we know that this is an error? It's an error because no type rule applies. So basically what we'll do is the type checker will try to pattern match this particular AST with some rule in the typing rule database. And it'll find that none of the rules pattern match at this point. And because it doesn't pattern match, we basically know that this must be a typing error because our type system doesn't recognize this kind of usage. And so the type checker is going to say this is an error. And once again, either we could stop here or we could try to recover from this position. So let's see how recovery may be possible. And so let's say that the expression had more things to it. For example, it's possible that the programmer is doing X plus Y and then doing concat on it. So maybe the programmer is expecting the result to be a string. And if the programmer is expecting it to be a string, maybe the type checker should just move on and say, okay, maybe you are expecting it to be a string. Let's move on and let's try to identify more errors. Maybe not, I'm not going to repeat this error again for you. I'm just going to believe that this is a string and then move on from there. How do I figure out that this should be a string or something else? Well, one easy way to do this is to basically define a new type, new dummy type that's not actually part of the language but it helps with our error recovery. And this type is the no type, let's say. So you introduce an imaginary type called no type. And this no type has a special property. This no type is a subtype of all other types in the language. So whatever types exist in the language, including user defined types, this no type will be considered to be a subtype of all these types, which means that any operation that was legal on any type T will also be legal on no type. So for example, I can execute the concat operation on no type because no type is a subtype of the string type and string has concat defined. So that's one way of being able to do this. So what will happen is that you are going to call .concat on no type. The type checker would assume that, okay, concat is coming from the string class. So the return value would still be a string. And now from there on, maybe more errors will get exposed if there are in the program. So it helps the compiler to be able to report multiple errors in one go. So every operation is defined on the no type with the no type result, or if we don't know, or if the, so for example, if it's a concat, so I should actually fix this with the no type result or the result of the operation. Okay. So for example, if it's a concat, then I know that the result will be a string. And now from there on, I can kind of start type checking as though it was a string and so on. So whether to give a no type result or a result of the operation is actually a design choice that the compiler designer may want to use. The trade-off is between finding more errors and kind of avoiding false errors or avoiding false positives or catching false negatives. So either you want to not omit possible error, more possible errors, or you just want to say that, okay, I don't really care about this particular tree, maybe some other tree or something like that. So let's try to recover from it with the no type result. So even the return value of .concat could be a no type and then, and so on. And so this would keep cascading until we get done with this particular expression and move on to the next expression. And then we can type check that particular expression. Notice that if we didn't use no type, then actually we would have no way to move forward because the type checker implementation just uses, just checks whether everything is well typed or not. So using no type, we can make an ill typed expression, a wrongly typed expression, a well typed expression, irrespective of whether we return a no type result or we return the result of the operation. Now, it's interesting to look at what the new subtyping relation looks like. Recall that we said that we assume in our language that void is a super type of all types. So if I was to draw this subtyping relation using this graph of directed edges, where an edge is drawn from type A to type B, if B is a subtype of type A, in this case, this would be the shape of our subtyping relation where all these nodes are the different types that exist in my programming language, including user defined types. And the top is void because it's a super type of all types. And the bottom would be our imaginary no type that would basically behave as though it's deriving or it's a subtype of all other types in the language.
