Title: Compiler Design Module 25 : Introduction to Bottom up Parsing
Video ID: UuhxSihoeC8
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

So today we're going to look at bottom-up parsing, which is another parsing algorithm stands in stark contrast to recursive descent parsing, also called top-down parsing. Unlike top-down parsing or recursive descent parsing, which tries to derive the string from the start symbol, bottom-up parsing is going to do the exact opposite. It's going to try to develop the derivation in reverse, which means it's going to reduce the string back to the start symbol. So we're going to see how that can be done. The reason we are studying bottom-up parsing is because bottom-up parsing is usually more general than top-down parsing in the sense that the predictive version of bottom-up parsing, which is typically what is used, can accept more grammars typically than the grammars that are accepted by top-down parsing. Recall that when we looked at LL1 parsing, we said that certain grammars that can be parsed using this algorithm are LL1 grammars. Similarly, LL1 was the predictive version of recursive descent parsing. Similarly, we'll have predictive versions of bottom-up parsing. And it turns out that the set of grammars that is accepted by bottom-up parsing is typically bigger than the set of grammars that is accepted by top-down parsing. And thus, it is an interesting algorithm to study. And in fact, it is the preferred method in parser-generator tools like Bison. So recall that we discussed that top-down parsing is simple, and for this reason, it is often used in compilers, for example, GCC. But there are parser-generator tools like Bison which accept any arbitrary grammar from the user and then generate a parser implementation for that grammar. Now, because these parser-generator tools need to accept any grammar from the user, they would like to use an algorithm to generate the parser that is as general as possible. And because bottom-up parsing is more general than top-down parsing, it is usually the algorithm of choice for such parser-generator tools like Bison. Okay, so let's get introduced to bottom-up parsing. Bottom-up parsing reduces a string to the start symbol. Unlike top-down parsing which derives the string from the start symbol, bottom-up parsing reduces the string back to the start symbol. That's how it works. And it does this by tracing the rightmost derivation in reverse. So recall that we talked about rightmost derivations. So rightmost derivations are derivations which derive the rightmost non-terminal at every step. So we start with the start symbol and the rightmost non-terminal is the start symbol itself and then we go to the first production and then we derive the rightmost non-terminal and so on. Recall that there could be multiple derivations to arrive at the same parse tree. For example, we could have a leftmost derivation or we could have a rightmost derivation and for bottom-up parsing we're going to trace back the rightmost derivation. Just to recall top-down passing or recursive descent passing was tracing the leftmost derivation in the forward direction. Bottom-up parsing is tracing the rightmost derivation in the reverse direction. All right, so let's look at an example. So let's use the same grammar that we have been using all through. The grammar of expressions, the unambiguous grammar of expressions, E can be either a term plus expression or a single term and a term t can be int star t or int or E in parentheses. Now let's look at this input string int star int plus int. To parse this string, basically we want to construct the parse tree and we're going to see how a bottom-up parser may proceed to parse this string. So first of all, we're going to assume that there is a marker. So this red arrow is the the current cursor position and it indicates how much of the input we have already read. So everything on the left of the cursor is stuff that we have already read and potentially reduced and everything on the right of the cursor is something that we haven't yet seen. All right, and so everything on the right of this cursor is the unmodified part of the string. Everything on the left of the cursor is potentially modified part of the string. So we initialize the cursor at the first position which is the leftmost point in the string and then we gradually keep advancing the cursor to the right. So when we advance, maybe at some point we are going to advance the cursor till at this position that's shown in the figure. And at this point we can say we may want to apply the derivation. So we know that there is a derivation called t can derive int and so we apply that derivation and at this point we say decide that you know we somehow decide. So right now I'm not talking about how we decide that and so on that's going to be the topic of the next few modules. But we somehow basically figured out that you know we want to convert this int to a t. Now this conversion is also called a reduction. So what is the reduction? It's just the derivation in the opposite direction. So t can derive int, int can reduce to t. In this case int is reducing to t and and the derivation that we have used to make this reduction is t derives int. So that's what I'm writing with in the green pen on the right. Then I can decide to do maybe another reduction and say that you know I want to reduce int star t to t. So I'm going to I'm kind of applying this derivation in the reverse direction or in other words I'm applying this reduction from int star t to t and I'm using this production t produces int star t. And so now this is the state of my this is the state of my parser at this point including where the cursor is placed. And then I may decide to let's say advance the cursor further and maybe I advance it all the way to the right and at this point I may decide to reduce the int on the right to t again. And so I'm again applying this production t derives int and after that maybe I want to reduce t to e and finally I reduce t plus e to e. Now I just showed you how a bottom up parser will operate on the string but I haven't really talked about you know how it is making these decisions and so on. So we're going to do that all that later. But notice that while I was doing this there is a pattern to how I decided to do this. In particular if I look at the string in reverse so I've basically reduced the original string int star int plus int to the start symbol e in this case and but if I look at it in the reverse direction then I would find that I am basically doing a rightmost derivation of the string. So notice that e produces t plus e. So what is the rightmost non-terminal? It's capital E. So now I derive t from that. Again the rightmost non-terminal is the the second t. Now I derive int from that and now this rightmost non-terminal is the first t it's the only t and now I do int star t and finally I get int star int plus int. So if I trace this sequence of steps in the reverse direction I'm basically getting a rightmost derivation and so a bottom up parser parsing algorithm is nothing but a rightmost derivation in reverse. So also when I read these steps bottom to top they look like productions or derivations and when I read these steps from top to bottom then they look like reductions. Also when we are reading from bottom to top we are producing the rightmost non-terminal at every step. So we just went through this example. This is an important fact of the algorithm as a central property of the algorithm that makes it work as we're going to see later. Alright if I look at the parse tree generated and the sequence of how the sequence of steps is able to generate the parse tree the first thing it does is it converts the second int to a t. So it reduces the second int to a t. Notice that it doesn't reduce the first int to a t and why does it decide to do that? Well we're going to look at all that later on but if I had reduced the first int to a t then it wouldn't have been a rightmost derivation. That could be one answer. The other answer could be if I reduce the first into a t they could they maybe they wouldn't have been a derivation at all. So how is the bottom up parser making these predictions or these choices is something we're going to look at later but in this case it just decided to reduce the second int if you recall in the derivation steps that I showed earlier. Then it decided to reduce the first three symbols int start t into a single t. Then it decided to reduce the last int to a t. Then it decided to reduce the last t to an e and finally it decided to reduce the entire expression t plus e to a single e which is the start symbol for us. So this is I mean I just showed you I just introduced what is a bottom up parser and how it would work for a string like this. We're going to look at how it works in more detail in the subsequent modules.
