Title: Compiler Design Module 184 : Proof Method
Video ID: 6n8eL7Gz3Xk
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

So we've been looking at all the different kinds of verification conditions for different imperative language constructs. And now we'll just generalize this whole discussion into a method for discharging any proof and also a set of rules which basically capture succinctly all the verification conditions that we have discussed so far for the kind of imperative language constructs that we have discussed such as assignment, if then else and loops. So firstly, in this module, I'm gonna talk about the proof method. And so given a precondition P and a program and a post condition Q, we're interested in finding whether this whole triple holds or not. And recall that a whole triple is basically a partial correctness condition. It says that if precondition holds and the program terminates or basically reaches this point, then Q holds, it doesn't talk about whether the program terminates or not or what happens if the program does not terminate and things like that. For example, if the program was non-terminating, then any Q actually would be okay here because one of the antecedents of this whole whole triple statement, the partial correctness statement is that if the program terminates and if the program doesn't terminate, then the statement is vacuously true. All right, so our strategy is going to be to find assertions, recall assertions are basically logical statements, find assertions AI attached to program points I and all program points I. So if you want to find all the assertions, let's say I just divide the program points into all the ends of the beginning of all the statements or the ends of all the statements and things like that. And then I basically attach one assertion and I can find the assertion everywhere. How we are going to define this assertion is going to depend on many things and we're going to have this discussion later on. Some of these assertions we can find using the strategies that we have discussed earlier, such as the one for if then is an assignment and for others like loops, we haven't yet discussed the strategy and we're going to characterize the problem of determining these assertions later on. It turns out that finding such assertions is undecidable in general. But once you have these assertions, you prove all these assertions to be invariant. Recall, what is an invariant? An invariant is an assertion that holds whenever a program reaches that particular point. And so we are interested in proving that all these assertions are invariant. How do we prove that all these assertions are invariant? Well, we start with the precondition and we prove that whenever the control reaches this point, then A1 holds. And that's exactly the whole triple partial correctness condition. And we know how to discharge what are the verification conditions associated with each such proof obligation which is associated with a partial correctness condition or also called the whole triple. And for example, using P, you can probably prove that A1 is an invariant at this point. Using P and A1, you can prove that A2 is an invariant at this point and so on. Once again, the proof effort or the proof obligations that are generated by trying to prove that these assertions, AIs are actually invariant, basically use the assignment or conditional loop VCs that we have been discussing. We have been discussing these using examples and a little informally, we are going to formalize this discussion in the next few modules. And finally, we want to prove that the invariant on exit, the last invariant, the invariant that we have been able to infer at the very end of the program actually proves the required post condition. So that's basically our last step in this proof method.
