Title: Compiler Design Module 158 : Program Dependence Graphs
Video ID: jz2_mHMLn20
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

So in our previous module, we discussed how some programs can be parallelized better if we just add a small amount of synchronization. In particular, we were looking at barrier synchronization that basically orders all iterations of some group of statements, some subset of statements within other group of statements. But within different groups, we can now exercise parallelism. And so this barrier synchronization actually enables more parallelism in each of the subparts. Now, question is, how can we design a compiler algorithm that identifies automatically where it can put the barriers, number one. And number two, in one of our examples, we also saw that the compiler should be able to automatically perform loop fission to separate two statements into two different loopness and put a barrier in between. And what is the algorithm that the compiler, what is the kind of reasoning that the compiler could use to basically do these transformations automatically? So the answer is going to be program dependence graphs. So what are program dependence graphs? Well, I'm going to discuss them in this lecture module. But basically, the problem that we're going to solve with program dependence graphs is that addition of barrier synchronization may require loop fission. And so we want to break the loop into as many separate loops as possible. If there are data dependencies, and then basically be able to say that, OK, if I put a barrier here, then this part of the program or this particular loopness, which has been broken up potentially through loop vision, can be parallelized. And then identify the barrier synchronization points and finally parallelize. So this is going to be our code generation strategy. But the first question is how to identify what are the statements which should be detected using loop vision and between which we should put a barrier synchronization. And the answer is going to come from program dependence graphs. So what is the program dependence graph or PDG, as I'm also going to call it? It has nodes which are static assignment statements. So static assignment statements, just like we talk about static three address code statements, we are talking about static assignment statements at the higher level because the whole assignment is going to move up or down in this case. It's not going to be single accesses that are going to move up and up or down. And barriers are going to be inserted across entire C statements, entire assignment statements, and not just individual static accesses. And then, so these are the assignments. So if I have, let's say, two statements, S1 and S2, and each of them has some amount of iteration space, my program dependence graph only has two nodes, one for S1 and one for S2. And I have an edge from statement S1 to a statement S2, if and only if, some dynamic instance of S1 shares a data dependence with a later dynamic instance of S2. Notice that the later word is key here, all right? So we already know how to identify whether some dynamic instance of S1 has a data dependence with some dynamic instance of S2. We use our data dependence constraints. We have also been using them, the data dependence constraints, in our space partitioning constraints. But this time, it's not just about, you know, there being a data dependency. But we want to identify if the data dependency is happening later in time, later in the ascending lexicographic order of the loop iteration space. So some statement, some dynamic instance of S1 has a data dependence to a later dynamic instance of S2. If the data dependence is to an earlier iteration instance of S2, then that is not counted, that is not, you know, in that case, we don't draw an edge in the program dependence graph PDG. But if the data dependence is to a later instance of S2, then we do draw an edge in the PDG. So we're going to see some examples of what is later and what is not later, and what kind of PDGs emerge for different types of programs. So how do we construct the PDG? Well, we basically first identify all the static statements, assignment statement in the program. That is the easy part. It's just evident from the program itself. And then we construct the data dependence constraints, which are just like our original data dependence constraints, which say capital F1, capital F1 i1 plus small f1 equals capital F2 i2 plus small f2, where one of them, where one of the accesses is a right, right? So that's a data dependence. But we also add another constraint, which is the ordering constraint, which basically captures the later requirement. It says that the i1 of iteration of S1, which has a data dependence with the i2 iteration of S2 should be, should proceed in the program execution order using the precedence order. So i1 should precede i2. So i1 of S1 should precede i2 of S2. And so this is basically written as this operator, this precedence operator with a subscript of S1, S2 saying that, you know, i1 of S1 should precede i2 of S2. Notice that it matters which, which, which statements we are looking at and also what iteration indices we are looking at for each statement. So i1 is the iteration vector for S1 and i2 is the iteration vector for S2. So, so this is for, you know, let's say from S1 to S2. Now, similarly, we could create edges from S2 to S1. So we do the same check of whether there is a data dependence from one statement of some dynamic instance of the one statement to some later dynamic instance of the other statement such that one of them was right. And so we first test this for S1, S2. Maybe there is, maybe there's not. If there is, we draw an edge in the PDG. If there's not, we don't draw an edge. And separately, we consider S2 to S1 and notice that it's not necessary that if there is an edge from S1 to S2, then there cannot be an edge from S2 to S1 and we're going to see examples of that. Moreover, S1 and S2 could potentially be the same statement. I could, you know, if there are some, there are data dependencies from some dynamic instance of S1 to some other dynamic instance, some later dynamic instance of S2, then, you know, then also, then basically I needed to draw an edge from S1 to itself and notice that in this case, when S1 and S2 are the same statement, then later, just later requirement actually goes away because it's almost like, you know, if you have two different dynamic instances, then one of them is going to be later anyway of the same statement. So if S1 and S2 are the same statement and they have a data dependence among some dynamic instances, one of them is going to be later. And so we'll draw an edge from S1 to itself. And in this case, I1 precedes I2, I1 of S1 precedes I2 of S2 is basically boils down to I1 precedes I2 in the iteration order, in the iteration space order, ascending lexicographic order of the S1 iteration space, right? So this becomes a simplified instance where S1 equals S2 because the precedence relation becomes much easier to compute. We just need to figure out whether I1 precedes I2 in the ascending lexicographic order. But when we are looking at two different statements, the problem becomes harder, as we're going to see with examples. Also, I want to point out, as I already said, that cycles are possible. So it's possible that I have an edge from S1 to S2 and an edge from S2 to S1 simultaneously. And even though the later requirements makes it seem like maybe it's only, you know, it's going to be one way edges, but actually we're going to see examples where we're going to get cycles like these. So let's look at our first example. And this example is basically something that we looked at before. So there's a two depth loop nest for I equals zero to N for J equals zero to M. Xij plus equals f of x i minus one j and this is S1. And then I have another loop nest, which is for I equals zero to N minus 10 for J equals 10 to M plus 20, some different loop nest bounds. I'm just using some loop, different loop nest bounds. Now the first thing is that the loop iteration bounds, the loop iteration spaces basically intersect, right? If M and N were large numbers, then the two loop iteration spaces intersect. And so there are data dependencies. If they didn't intersect, then there would be no data dependencies. Now I want to figure out what is the program dependence graph for this program. And the nodes are going to be, there only going to be two nodes, S1 and S2. And I claim that this is my program dependence graph. So if I look at S1, there are dependencies from iterations of S1 to other iterations of S1, because some iterations are accessing Xij and the other iterations are accessing X i minus one j. And whenever X i minus one j equals Xij for different, X i prime minus one comma j prime equals Xij for different ij and i prime j prime. Then we have a data dependence across multiple iterations of the same S1. We have seen this repeatedly in our previous example as well. And so in this case, we basically have a self edge from S1 to itself. Now, similarly, the same logic I have in self edge from S2 to itself. Now, finally, I need to basically consider S1, S2, and then I need to consider S2, S1. So if I look at S1, S2, notice that S1 is basically accessing elements Xij and X i minus one j. And S2 is accessing elements Xij and Xij minus one. But the good thing is that all the iterations of S1 finish before any iteration of S2 begins. So already we know that the edges can only be from S1 to S2 because there's no iteration of S1 that occurs after any iteration of S2. So there cannot be an edge from S2 to S1. So we don't need to really consider S2 to S1 in this case, because we know that all iterations of S1, all dynamic instances of S1 must finish before any dynamic instance of S2. So in other words, there is no dynamic instance of S1 that happens after some dynamic instance of S2. And so the only question is, should there be an edge from S1 to S2? And the answer is actually very easy. The answer is yes. There are both read after write, write after read, and write after write dependencies. Because for example, the 0,0th iteration or let's say 0,10th iteration of S1 accesses X010 and the 0,10th iteration of S2 also accesses X010 and both of them are right. And so there's a data dependence from some dynamic instance of S1 to some dynamic instance of S2, where the dynamic instance of S2 occurs later in the program. And so I draw in it from S1 to S2 and this becomes my program dependence graph. This program dependence graph is important because it's basically saying that which of these statements depends, some dynamic instance of these statements depend on some dynamic instance of the other statements. So here, dynamic instances of S2 depend on dynamic instances of S1, but not the other way around. And so what it means, and we're going to do this later, is that we can potentially put a barrier between this, all right? Because there are no edges, there are no edges going in the other direction. There are only edges going in the forward direction. And if the edges are unidirectional, then we can put a barrier and it basically means that there are only dependencies in one direction. So we can finish everything on the left-hand side before starting anything on the right-hand side. Okay. Let's take another example. Let's say this loop for i equals 1 to n, i++, x i equals y i plus z i, w a i equals x i. This is the example that we had looked at in the previous module as well. And let's call the first statement S1 and let's call the second statement S2. Now, if I draw the program dependence graph for this, my first question is, does S1 have a data dependency with itself? And the answer is no, because if you look at S1, it's basically completely data parallel, different iterations of S1, different instance of S1 are not accessing, are accessing distinct elements of memory. Similarly, S2, if I look at S2 with itself, because of the w a i, we don't know what a i could be. It could be arbitrary. It could, you know, all of the, for all the different i's, a i could value to the same value, let's say zero, in which case different instances of S2 have data dependencies to later instances of S2 itself. And so I have a self edge from S2 to itself. And finally, I consider S1 to S2 and also I consider S2 to S1. So when I consider S1 to S2, I notice that, you know, in the first iteration, S1 is going to write to X0 and S2 is going to read from X0. So right there, there is a read after write dependency from the one instance or the first instance of S1 to the first instance of S2. And the first instance of S2 in this case executes later in the original program order than the first instance of S1. And so from the first instance itself, I can simply say that, oh, okay, I need to draw an edge from S1 to S2. We can look at more instances as well, but this is actually good enough for us to do so. I'm going to look at the mathematical algorithm to do these things automatically. But for now, I'm just going, I'm just basically giving you a qualitative understanding of how we can reason about drawing these edges in the PDG. Now, the other thing we need to do is how to draw and whether there needs to be an edge from S2 to S1. So let's see, the first iteration, S2 is going to access X1 and S1 is going to access X1 as well, but the execution of the first iteration of S1 happens before the execution of first iteration of S2. And so in this case, we don't meet the constraint that there is a later instance of S1, which basically kind of has data dependency to some instances of S2. Now let's look at, and moreover, all the other instances of S2, the ones that are coming after are going to access X1, X2, X3, X4, and so on. And S1 is also going to basically access X1, X2, X3, X4, and so on. But whenever these two access the same location, for example, both of them access let's say X4, it is always true that S1's access to X4 is before S2's access of X4. Okay. It's never the case that S2's access of X4 is after S1's access of X4. It's never the case that S2's access of X4 is before S1's access of X4. And I'm just using X4 as one example, but if I look at any XI, then it never the case that S2's access of XI is before the S1's access of the same XI. Okay. And so I don't need to draw an edge from S2 to S1. This is, this is a little bit subtle and I want, you know, I hope, you know, this was clear. I also want to point out that I don't really need to look at W, Y, and Z because, you know, S1 is not touching W and S2 is not touching Y and Z. So it's only X that I'm looking at in this particular example. And so this program dependence graph is also interesting because now I know that at this point here, the dependencies are all unidirectional and so it is possible to put a barrier if it helps in improving my parallelization. Let's look at another example. Let's say I changed the program slightly and instead of XI, I basically had XI plus one plus XI minus one. And now it basically becomes clear that there is some dynamic instance of S2, which is data dependent on some dynamic instance of S1 because some later dynamic instance of S1. So in the first iteration, S2 is reading X2 and it's a second iteration. So if I look at, you know, the access to X2, then S1 is, S1's second iteration is basically doing this and S2's first iteration is reading it. So first iteration is read and second iteration of S1 is writing X2 and so, and moreover, the second iteration of S1 is, you know, is after, so second iteration of S1 is after first iteration of S2 and so basically I have my required constraint and so this time I need to also draw an edge from S2 to S1. I will, you know, the original edge from S1 to S2 remains because, you know, if I look at XI and XI minus one, I would find that later instances, earlier instances of S1 are dependent on later instances of S2. For example, the first iteration of S1 depends on the second iteration of S2, all right, or the second iteration of S2 depends on the first iteration of S1. So there is an edge from S1 to S2 because of XI minus one and there is an edge from S2 to S1 because of XI plus one and so now I have a program dependence graph where it's not possible to find a split where the flow of dependency is unidirectional. Let's look at this other example, XI equals WI plus ZI and WAI equals XI. Now, once again, WI, the S1 iterations are data parallel. So there are no dependencies between different iterations of S1, but there are dependencies between some iterations of S2 and some iterations of S1 because WAI is unknown. So for example, the first iteration of S1 could have accessed W1 and the second iteration of S2 could also access W1 because AI could have been one and I can do it the other way around. Also, for example, the second iteration of S1 could access W2 and the first iteration of S2 could access W2 as well because A1 could have been two. And so there are edges in both directions. And once again, I don't have a split point where the flow of dependencies is unidirectional. Here is another interesting example. For I equals one to N, I plus plus, ZI equals ZI divided by WI and then I have an inner loop for J equals I, J is less than equal to N, J plus plus, XIJ equals YIJ square and ZJ plus equals XIJ. Now, the first thing to notice here is that S1 is data parallel because they are all accessing different elements. They are all indexed by I and so they are all accessing data elements. So there's no self loop from S1 to S1. Similarly, there is no self loop from S2 to S2. They're all accessing different elements across different iteration spaces. And similarly, there is no self loop from S3 to S3 either. OK, so now first we have we just check the self loops. Now we check every pair of statements. So let's look at S1 and from S1 to S3. And it is very clear that S1 is going to execute, you know, touch Z and S3 is also going to touch Z and let's look at the ordering. So S1 is going to touch Z1, Z2, Z3, Z4 and so on. And S3 is also going to touch Z1 because J starts from I, notice, and so Z1, Z2, Z3, Z4. And so, for example, if I just look at Z1, S1 accesses, writes to Z1 and S3 also writes to Z1. And the S3 is write to Z1 is after S1 write to Z1. And so there is an edge from S1 to S3. So the edge from S1 to S3 is actually pretty easy to see because the same element Z1 is being written where S3 is write is after S1 write. Now, if I look at the other way round, S3 to S1. Notice that S3 is basically writing Z1, Z2, Z3 and so on in the first write for I equals 1 because it is the inner loop, right? So even for I equals 1, I'm going to start writing Z1, Z2, Z3 because it's iterating on J. And then for I equals 2, which happens later. So this was S1, S3. And now for I equals 2, S1 is going to write Z2. And so we can see that there is a data dependency from an earlier instance of Z3 to a later instance of S1, right? Because if I look at Z2, Z2 is being written for I equals 1, J equals 2, which happens before the write to Z2, which happens when I equals 2. So in other words, 1, 2, this is I, J is happens before. And this is S1, S3 happens before 2, right? So the 1, 2, so this is S3, S1, sorry. This is S3, S1. So the 1, 2th iteration of S3 happens before the 2th iteration of S1, OK? And so we have an edge in the other direction as well from S3 to S1. Finally, if I look at S2, I find that there is no data dependency between S1 and S2 because they're basically accessing different arrays. But if I look at S2 and S3, we have a common element which is X, I, J. And so there is a data dependency from S2 to S3 because it's the same element, let's say X00 or X11 that is being written by S2 and then being read by S3. But you would find that because the, you know, they are all writing different elements at different instances, there is no edge in the other direction. In other words, it can never happen that some X, I, J was written by S3, read by S3 first and then it was written by S2, the same X, I, J value, because that's how, you know, that's how this program looks like. Once again, I'm just giving you a qualitative explanation. We're going to have mathematical method to find these things automatically later on. So important thing is that there is an edge from S2 to S3, but not an edge from S3 to S2. So in this case, I cannot draw a barrier here. So this, that's not possible, but I can draw a barrier here because there's a unidirectional flow of dependencies from S2 to S3. And in this case, if I was to do a program transformation, I would just move S2, you know, I would move S2 into a separate loop of itself. This is loop fission and then put a barrier in the middle that improved my parallelism. And so these are the kind of, the program dependence graph is giving us hints on what can be moved up, what can be, what are candidates for loop fission without changing the meaning of the program. And once we have done the loop fission, we have different loopness and we can also potentially put barriers if that helps our parallelism cause. Here is another example. So here is the generated code after we have moved the S2, hoisted up S2 value statement upwards. So this is basically the whole loop nest for S2 and then we have S1 and S3. So this is just the code generated based on the program dependence graph that we drew. All right, I just want to point out that if I change the example slightly, so instead of Xij, if I had and in my previous example, I had Xij here and Xij here for S3. But now if I change the S3 access to X i plus 1j, I claim that I need to also draw an edge from S3 to S2, because if I look at the 1 comma 1th iteration of S3, then that basically would proceed. So if I look at S3 comma S2, then 1 comma 1th iteration of S3 would precede the 1 comma, 2 comma 1th iteration of S2. And so and they are data dependent. And so I will need an edge from S3 to S2. And in this program dependence graph, there is no opportunity for inserting a barrier and or loop fishing.
