Title: Compiler Design Module 133 : Data Reuse
Video ID: pEFqlL6If3E
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

So last time we discussed how we can reason about memory accesses, in particular array accesses within a loopness which has a fine bounds. Basically, the motivation for being able to reason about memory accesses, is to be able to identify what is the memory footprint of each iteration and based on that identify what iterations are related in some way. For example, whether two iterations have a data dependency or not. One of the important properties here is data reuse. This is different from dependencies and data reuse basically identify sets of iterations that access the same data or the same memory location. We can also say the same cache line if we are really worried about locality at cache line reality. Basically, we want to identify iterations that access the same data, so that if we want to optimize for let's say locality, then we would want to bring those iterations close together in execution time. This is useful for locality optimizations. Then there is another type of property that we would be interested in based on that information which is data dependence. Here we want to identify accesses that refer to the same memory location or the same data similar to data reuse, and at least one of them is a write. That basically means that those two iterations are data dependent. In other words, there is a dependency from the second iteration to the first iteration, they cannot be reordered with respect to each other. So notice that there has to be at least one access that's a write. So if both accesses are a read, that still qualifies for data reuse, but it's not a data dependency. So when one access is a write and the other could be either a read or a write, there are three types of data dependencies that could emerge. One is called the read after write dependency, which is where the first access is a read and the second access is a write to the same location. The second is a write after read dependency, where the first access is a write and the second access is a read, and the third is a write after write dependency, which is where both accesses are writes. These are also called raw, war, and valve dependencies for short. You can imagine that in each of these cases, it is not okay to reorder the two iterations because that would produce a different result from the original program. Okay, I'm going to focus on data reuse in this particular lecture module, and reuse can be further categorized into two categories. One is called self-reuse, where multiple iterations of the same static statement, the same piece of code, same statically identifiable syntax, the same statement access the same data. It's the same statement statically speaking, but different iterations of that statement, that happen to access the same data, and that's called self-reuse because it's the same statement. So I'm just reusing data. I'm basically accessing the same data across different iterations and it's also the same statement, and that's why it's called self-reuse. The other type of reuse is where the statements are different. So two iterations of different statements access the same data, in which case it's called group reuse. It's like there are two different statements in my static code, and they share across different iterations the same data. Notice that in this case, they need not be necessarily different iterations, even if they access the same data in the same iteration, even that would be called group reuse. So once again, what is group reuse? Two potentially same iterations of different static statements, different code statements access the same data. Further, reuse is classified into two types of reuse. One is called temporal and others called spatial. A reuse is called temporal reuse, and sometimes we just omit the use of the word temporal, it's a data reuse. So a data reuse is temporal if exact same data is accessed. So same memory location, same sequence of bytes is accessed, multiple times across different iterations. It's called spatial if it's not the exact same data, it's two different pieces of data, but those two pieces of data happen to lie in the same cache line. And spatial reuse is more meaningful when we are basically talking about cache line level locality, whereas temporal reuse is meaningful in all situations, irrespective of whether we are doing cache line level locality or whether we are just interested in general locality. So here's an example to understand these different types of reuse and how they manifest with an example. So let's say I have an array, and let's say this array is an array of floats and it is of size n, where n is some loop invariant variable in my program. And then I have this loop nest, which says for i equals zero to n, for j equals zero to n, zj plus one equals zj plus zj plus one plus zj plus two, divide by let's say two or three or something like that. And here is each of zj, zj plus one, zj plus two, first of all have self-spatial reuse. Why do they have self-spatial reuse? Across different iterations. So firstly, what is the iteration space? Iteration space of i comma j goes from zero comma zero to n minus one comma n minus one. So that's the square-shaped iteration space in a two-dimensional space. And then if I look at, for example, zj, then in some iteration, it's going to be zj. In the next iteration, it's going to be zj plus one. And because float is just eight bytes long and maybe my cache line is going to be on the order of 64 bytes long, there's a lot of self-spatial reuse just if I look at zj in isolation. So first of all, when I use the word same statement or different statements, it doesn't necessarily mean that I'm talking about the entire C statement. Each of these accesses can be thought of as different statements, each of the memory accesses. So every memory access can be put in a statement of its own. So for example, in this particular C statement, there are one, two, three, four, four different memory accesses and we can treat each of these memory accesses as a separate statement for our polyhedral analysis that we're going to, that we're talking about from a reuse standpoint. And so zj is a different statement, zj plus one is a different statement, and so on. Now if I look at zj, zj across different iterations accesses the same cache line because zj and zj plus one, zj plus two, zj plus three likely to have this, likely to hit in the same cache line. And so zj has self-spatial reuse. Similarly, by the same argument, zj plus one has self-spatial reuse and zj plus two also has self-spatial reuse. And there's high spatial locality even when we consider each statement in isolation. Moreover, if I look at any of these, once again, let's say I look at zj plus one or if I look at zj, they also have high self-temporal reuse. In other words, different iterations in my iteration space accesses exact same data. It's not about the same cache line, but also exact same data. Can you see that? Well, it doesn't access the same data for different iterations of j, but notice the outer loop, which is for i equals zero to n. So for all the different iterations of the outer loop, it will access the same location zj, right? So for example, if j was 10, then it's going to access z10 for all the different values of i. And so zj also exhibits self-temporal reuse apart from just self-spatial use. In fact, each of these, zj, zj plus one, zj plus two exhibit self-temporal reuse because exact same element is accessed repeatedly once for each iteration of the outer loop. Finally, they also have group spatial reuse and group temporal reuse because if I'm accessing zj and if I look at zj and zj plus one, these are two different statements that are going to likely access the same cache line because zj and zj plus one are very high with a very high probability would be lying in the same cache line. And so there's group spatial reuse there. Moreover, there is group temporal reuse because across different iterations, in the previous iteration, what was accessed by zj would be accessed by zj plus one in the iteration before that. Or similarly, in the previous iteration, what was accessed by zj plus one would be accessed in the current iteration by zj. And so there is also group temporal reuse. It's the exact same data that is being accessed by two different statements across two different iterations. So in this particular example, we see instances of self-spatial reuse, self-temporal reuse, group spatial reuse and group temporal reuse. Analyzing this example a little bit further, what is the total number of memory accesses in this particular program? Notice that there are n square iterations and for each iteration, there are four different memory accesses. Zj plus one, zj, zj plus one and zj plus two. Zj plus one is being read once and written once and so we count them as two different memory accesses. So the total number of memory accesses, is the number of iterations into four, four for every iteration. Now if I look at what is the memory footprint of this particular program, we will see that the memory footprint is only n by c cache lines because what is the total amount of distinct memory locations that this program accesses and that's just going from j to, j goes from zero to n and then I access zj, zj plus one, zj plus two. So it's only, you know, order of, so the total number of distinct memory locations that I'm accessing is at most n plus two or order n, all right? And then if I just divide it by the cache line size c, then I basically say that my memory footprint size is n by c cache lines. So if the number of accesses is four n square and the footprint is only n by c, clearly there is reuse because of the pigeonhole principle. There is more accesses, there are larger number of accesses to a smaller number of data so it must be true that some data is being accessed repeatedly. And if we analyze this further, factor of n in this difference between four n square and n by c is coming due to self-temporal reuse because the outer loop iteration doesn't really matter and, you know, from the, in terms of the address that is accessed. So the same address is accessed n times and that's the self-temporal reuse for each of these four statements. And so that just gives us a factor of n straight away. So four n square by n and that leaves us with four n. You know, four n, that leaves us with four n. Now let's figure out what's the other factors that can bring us all the way down to n by c. A factor of c due to self-spatial reuse because zj is going to be, you know, z, the same, cache line is going to be accessed by the same statement across different iterations because there's a high spatial locality, zj, zj plus one, zj plus two, zj plus three and so on by the same statement zj across different values of j. And so that's come, see, the factor of c is coming due to self-spatial reuse. And then the fact is that all each of these four statements are actually, you know, accessing the same data in different points on time. And so factor of four is coming due to group reuse, whether it is group spatial reuse or group temporal reuse and, or, you know, I could just say group temporal reuse in this case. You know, I could kind of credit this factor of four and factor of c in different, a portion of these contributions in different ways, but basically a factor of four is coming due to group reuse. And so that's how, from four n squared, divide by n, divide by c, divide by four, I get n by c. And that's how, and that explains my reuse. So once again, the number of memory accesses was four n squared. The memory footprint was n by c. So clearly there is reuse. How do I explain that reuse? Well, a factor of n is coming due to self-temporal reuse. A factor of c is coming due to self-spatial reuse. And a factor of four is coming due to group reuse.
