Title: Compiler Design Module 43 : Typechecker Implementation
Video ID: EplUYdZVk64
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

So, so far we have looked at different typing rules and now we're going to discuss how to implement type checking, right? So actually we have already discussed this a little bit when we got introduced the idea of type checking and type inference, but now we're going to actually look at some rules and look at the realization in terms of code or pseudo code as a type checker. So recall that type checking involves traversing the abstract syntax tree and doing a bottom-up transfer of types. And so at any point in the abstract syntax tree, you have, let's say a node n with children, c1 dot dot ci. And in this abstract syntax tree, the environment is passed usually down the tree or sometimes, you know, across the siblings and type information is passed up the AST, all right? So the information is going to travel in a certain direction in terms of the environment. The environment information is going to travel top down or maybe left to right, and type information is going to get passed up the AST. So let's look at some examples. So type inference may also be possible. So this was type checking, but let's look at type inference. Type inference may also be possible in a single AST pass. So just like this, you basically descend down the AST, building the environment, and then you go back up, giving types to everything, and then everywhere there's a missing type, you can fill up the missing type based on the rules. Sometimes, for some languages, this can be done as a single AST pass, you know, depending on how much of, so checking can always be done in a single AST pass, but inference is a little bit more complex, and languages like C and C++ restrict inference to things that can be done in a single AST pass. So for example, this auto keyword in C++ can only be used to infer types in certain patterns where it would be possible to infer the type in a bottom-up traversal. Whereas certain other languages like OCaml, they have much more elaborate type inference mechanism, for example, which may require multiple passes. So they would say that, okay, they would even recognize types of identifiers based on the context in which they are being used anywhere in the program. And so that requires multiple passes over the AST to be able to narrow down the set of possible types that a particular identifier can have. And there are different algorithms to be able to do type inference in such languages like OCaml, but we are not really discussing that in this course. But it's interesting to note that many type inference algorithms can actually be implemented in a single AST pass, and in fact, languages like C and C++ support such kind of type inference. For example, expressions in C and the auto keyword in C++. All right, so now let's look at a single rule, a typing rule, and look at its particular implementation, how it may be implemented in a typical programming environment that we are used to using recursion and things like that. So let's look at this particular rule, typing rule that says if under an environment, E1 is an integer and E2 is an integer, then under the same environment, E1 plus E2 is an integer, is type integer. So to be able to implement this, we're going to have a code which looks like this, it says, anytime you have an AST node which has a plus in it, here is one way to type check it. You first type check the left side, the left node of the plus operator, so that would be E1. So I would say T1 equals type check ENV E1. So type check is a method or function that I'm defining that takes two arguments. The first argument is the environment, that includes O and C, that includes E, O and C in it. And the second argument is the expression, which is whatever is on the left side of the colon. And its return value is basically the type of this expression under this environment. So if I want to find the type of E1 plus E2 under a given environment ENV, then based on this rule, I would say first find the type of E1 under the same environment ENV. And let's say that the answer is T1. So first of all, this call basically says that type check succeeded and it returned T1. And we basically check whether T1 is an integer or not. So I'll write this check in red because the meaning is that if this check fails, then I basically bail out and say that the type check failed based on this rule. Maybe there's some other rule that can type check this particular expression, but not this rule. So if E1 was not an integer, then this particular rule cannot be applied on it. And that's what check is going to do. It's going to maybe return a type error and in which case the caller should basically try some other rule. The top level caller would probably call type check for different, for all the possible rules to see which one matches if any. And you can imagine more efficient algorithms instead of actually going through each and every rule, you can index the rules so that only the relevant rules are compared. All right, similarly, you do T2 equals type check ENV E2. So you type check E2 under the same environment ENV and let's say you get a type T2. And once again, you're going to check whether T2 is an integer or not because that's what the two hypotheses are. So at this point, all the hypotheses are being met because both the checks have succeeded, in which case I can conclude by just returning the type integer for E1 plus E2. All right, so that's the conclusion. That represents the conclusion of our type E2. And so this method here type checks based on this particular rule. And so for every rule, I could have a different method like this or and then the type checker could basically call each of these methods to see which one of them matches if any. And if depending on which one matches, I could basically either infer or check. And if none of them matches, then I would basically say it's a type E2. Now here is a more complicated example. This is going to be our last example. So in this example, this is again taken from something that we've already discussed. This is the declaration no in it, where basically we're looking at a declaration of the type Tx equals E0 semicolon E1, colon, so what should be the type of this whole expression here, right? And so that's what I want to check. And in my hypothesis, notice that I have rules of the following form. So for this to have type T1, E0 should have type T0 for some arbitrary type T0. And under the updated environment, which maps X to T, E1 should have type T1. And T0 should be a subtype of T, in which case I would be able to say that this whole expression of type T1. Notice that T1 here is the same T1 that was the type of E1 under the updated environment, okay? So to be able to implement this rule, once again, this is my type check function that takes an environment and the expression. In this case, the expression is a new scope with a declaration and a statement or a statement expression E1. Now, the first thing I do here is check what is the type of E0. So I said T0 equals type check ENV E0, all right? So notice I'm using the same ENV because that's the ENV O, C that's being used here, right? So whatever is the O, C that's being passed to this function is the same ENV being used to type check E0. And let's say we get type T0. Then notice that I'm not really checking what's T0. I just say it's T0, all right? Because there is actually no requirement on T0 if you look at this rule. It doesn't say that T0 needs to be an end or something like that. So I really don't have any requirement here, except that I have a requirement that T0 needs to be a subtype of T, all right? So I'm gonna do that later, all right? So I'm gonna check that in the third rule in my third hypothesis and that's the third step. The second step is I'm going to say I'm gonna type check E1, but I'm going to change the environment before I type check E1. That's exactly what this rule says, right? And how am I gonna change it? I'm going to add to the environment a mapping from X to T, capital T. So I type check under this new environment env.add x colon T, the expression E1, and let's say I get T1. Then I check whether T0 is a subtype of T, all right? So whether T0 is a subtype of capital T and capital T recall is occurring as a part of the AST syntax. It says that this is the type of the newly declared variable. And if all these three checks pass, which means all the three hypotheses are being met, I basically have my conclusion, which is I can return T1. And notice that T1 is nothing but the type that was returned by the type check on E1 under the updated environment. So that's going to return T1, right? So this is the implementation for this particular rule, declaration no in it.
