Title: Compiler Design Module 64 : Operational Semantics for Simple Operations
Video ID: JMnk_KFiUSQ
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

So now we'll start discussing the operational semantics for our C, C++-like language. And we're going to do this using our formal typing rule, a formal evaluation rules of inference. And we'll start with simple rules and then we'll gradually build up to more complex rules. We'll not exhaustively enumerate all the rules, but we'll enumerate hopefully enough rules to give you a flavor of what these rules look like. So our first few rules are basically about constants. So for example, this particular rule says that inside this context S0, which is the current object, this object, a variable environment E and the store S, true evaluates to the Boolean value true. So I'm representing a Boolean value true using this notation bool brackets true, and it leaves the state unchanged, right? So that's what comma S means. So whatever it was the store here is the store here. So store is unchanged, the value is true. And similarly, the rule for false S0ES under this context, it is true that the identifier false, the constant false evaluates to the Boolean value false and does not modify the store, okay? And a similar rule can be used for an integer. So if I is an integer literal, so I'm informally specifying what is an integer literal, we already at this point, because of our lecture, we know what is an integer literal and so on. And so if I is an integer literal, then under a context that integer literal I, so it evaluates to int I and leaves the state unchanged. By integer literal, I mean a constant like three or seven or whatever, okay? So those are all rules for constants. Now the next rule is for a variable identifier. And here we say that we want to know what does ID, which is ID stands for a variable identifier. What is the value that it represents? V, and what is the side effects that it causes? So first of all, it does not cause any side effects because the same store that is under which ID was evaluated is returned by the evaluation of ID. But the value is determined by the environment and the store that was part of the context. So if the environment maps ID to LID, LID is the location of that particular variable, and the store maps LID to a value V, then under that context S0ES, ID evaluates to V, S, all right? So basically if the environment maps ID to a location and the store maps that location to a value V, then at the ID evaluates to that value V and leaves the store unchanged. And the current object is not relevant for the evaluation of this particular expression ID. All right, okay? And now we have a similar rule, but this time it's the this keyword in C++. So what does this keyword evaluate? So under the context, this evaluates to S0. And leaves the state store unchanged. So what do I mean by returns S0? Well, I'm just assuming that S0 is being stored as a pointer to the current object, let's say. And so under that, this should just return that pointer back, all right? And so this is the first time we see S0 being used on the right-hand side of an inference rule. And also notice that there is no precondition for this rule to trigger. So this will always evaluate to the current object in which it has been evaluated, all right? Okay, now let's look at the assignment rule, the rule for the assignment operator. I'm using the colon equal to notation for the assignment operator. So ID is assigned the value E under a context S0 ES. What is the value that it returns and how does it update the store? Now this is perhaps the first expression that we are seeing that both returns a value and updates the store, that means it has side effects. Okay, so what is the value that it returns and what is the store that it returns? Well, to do this, we need to evaluate E under the same context, and so that's what we do. So if under the same context S0 ES, the RHS of the assignment E evaluates to V, S1, so it may update the store from S to S1. So let's say if E evaluates to V and updates the store to S1 and ID is mapped to LID, and so then what do we return? We want to return S1 updated such that LID has been updated with the value V, that's what the semantics of assignment is, right? So whatever is the location that ID points to, we want to update the contents of that location with the new value as computed by E. What is the new value that's computed by E? It's V. What is the location pointed to by ID? It's LID. So we want to say that S2 equals S1, where LID has been replaced with V, right? So this is the new store, and that's the store that gets returned by this assignment. So whatever is the store that was returned by the RHS of the assignment, that is updated such that V is stored at the location LID, and that's what's returned by this particular assignment. That's S2, and that's what's returned by S2. Notice that this particular order, this particular set of rules also determines the order of evaluation. For example, it says that you need to first evaluate E, and then whatever are the result of E, you need to assign it to ID. And so if the evaluation of E involved some side effect, then that should happen before the side effect due to this particular assignment. So for example, notice that this S1 needs to be used in the RHS of this particular rule. So that means S1 needs to be computed before S2 can be computed. And that basically means that E needs to be computed before the assignment can be executed. It is, these subtleties are important because let's take an example. Let's say I have X equals star X equals three. Now this statement, what if, or let's say, let's make it a little simpler. Let's say X equals star Y equals three, all right? And now in this particular case, it is possible for, so I need to first evaluate star Y equals three, which will have its own side effect. And only after that do I evaluate this, the whole expression, the outer assignment, right? And this order is important because if I do it in the other order, then the final state will be different. For example, if I first assign X and then assign star Y, then if X and star Y were pointing to the same location, then the state would be different from if I first evaluate star Y equals three and then evaluate X equals star Y equals three, okay? So the order is important and these particular rules are basically saying what the order is. And the order in this case is that the RHS of the assignment is evaluated before the assignment is executed. All right, let's take another example. In this time, we're going to look at the addition operator or any other binary arithmetic operator. E1 plus E2, what does it stand for? Well, clearly under a context. So we evaluate E1 under that context and let's say E1 returns V1 and returns a new state S1. Notice that E1 could basically also have some side effects so E1 would maybe return a new store S1. And then E2 is evaluated under the new store, all right? So E and S0 remain the same, but store has changed during evaluation of E2. So E2 is evaluated in a different context from E1. E2 is evaluated in a context which has the side effects induced by E1, which are captured by S1. And then under this context, if E2 evaluates to V2, S2, then under the original context, E1 plus E2 evaluates to V1 plus V2, S2, all right? So this was a typo. V1 plus V2, S2, all right? So that's the complete rule. And once again, notice that before I can evaluate E2, I need to have the context for in which this evaluation needs to be performed. And so to have the context, I need S1 and S1 can only be available after I've evaluated E1. So this again dictates the order of evaluation. It's basically saying that in case of E1 plus E2, E1 should be evaluated before E2 is evaluated. So once again, this is important. And I can again use an example to show this. If I have X equals Y3 plus Y equals four. Let's make it star Y equals four. Now, if X and star Y are pointing to the same location, then X, the order matters. If I evaluate the first assignment, then the final value of the store could be different. If I evaluate the first assignment first, then the final value of the store would be different from if I evaluate the second assignment first, all right? And this particular rule is basically clearly disambiguating what the order is. It says that the left operand is evaluated before the right operand, all right? Now, the language like C, C++ also has a notion of statements. And although C and C++ do not associate values with statements in our particular language, if you recall from the typing rules, we were associating values with statements as well. So for example, if I have the semicolon operator, that's the separator operator, then E1 semicolon E2 is basically a statement that evaluates to whatever is the value returned by E2, right? So once again, the rule is the following, that under the context S0ES, you first evaluate E1, to get V1, S1, and then you evaluate E2 under the new store S1. And let's say you get V2, S2, then this whole expression E1 semicolon E2 evaluates to V2, S2. Once again, these are not C, C++ semantics. These are just semantics of our own custom language that we are using and we are giving values. So the idea is that if you join lots of expressions using the semicolon, then the final expression that is created, the statement expression, so to say, has the value that is the value returned by the last expression in that long list of expressions separated with the semicolon operator, okay? All right. And similarly, there's the notion of a statement block. So I could have a statement block where I could just put the expression or a statement expression or any other thing which looks like an expression under inside curly braces to indicate a new scope. And if the inside of the curly braces, inside of the scope evaluates to V, S1 under the same context, then the scope makes no difference. The scope, the expression put under the scope also evaluates to the same value and to the same store S1. So this is the rule for a statement block. Okay. So we have seen some rules to see how we assign values and specify side effects of expression evaluation. Let's see how we're going to use these rules to evaluate an expression. So let's say we have this small expression, X colon equals, so colon equals stands for assignment. So X is assigned seven plus five, semicolon four. So what is the value that this expression is going to evaluate through? And what is the final store at the end of this evaluation? Notice that none of the rules that we have discussed so far either update the environment E of that variable environment, nor do they update the S0, the current object. So the only question that remains is what are, what is the value and what is the store? So everything, the environment and the current object are not changed by these evaluations. Okay, and in the beginning we can assume that S0 is some arbitrary current object S0. E has a mapping for X to LX. So E maps the variable X to LX. So this is a variable environment. It already, so X is in the scope of the variable environment. And S is a store and store maps LX to zero initially before the evaluation of this expression starts. So we are interested in knowing that under this context of S0, E, S, what does this expression evaluate to? And so this is what our evaluation judgment is going to look like. Under S0, E, S, what does this expression evaluate to? And the question we are asking is what's the value and what's the new store? To be able to answer this question, we'll first, we'll basically apply our evaluation rules using a top-down traversal of the expression AST, abstract syntax tree. And so the first operator here is going to be the scope operator, and that really does nothing. And so I'm going to omit one or two steps here or there. And so I'm not going to show the step for the scope because that really does nothing really. But the next step is basically looking at the next top-level operator in the AST would be the semicolon delimiter, which joins the two expressions. And so I'm going to say, I'm going to apply that rule, which is the statement rule, if you recall. And so that rule says that first evaluate the left-hand side of the semicolon operator under the same environment, S0, E, S, and find out what the value is, and then evaluate the right-hand side of the semicolon, which is four, under an updated environment. In the updated environment, the S0 and E parts remain the same, but the store S can be changed. So we don't know what the store is until we evaluate the left-hand side. And so these are all the unknowns have been marked using the red question mark. So it's clear that before I can evaluate the right-hand side, I need to evaluate the left-hand side because I need to have the context before I can even start evaluating the right-hand side of the semicolon operator. So when I look at the left-hand side, it is basically an assignment. So I'm going to apply the assignment rule. And so I'm going to apply the assignment rule, and actually I have skipped that in this particular... I am using the assignment rules just that I've labeled it wrongly. So this is the assignment rule. All right, so I'm using the assignment rule. And in the assignment rule, I first evaluate the RHS of the assignment. So although I'm writing it in the different order, it's the RHS that's evaluated first, and then the LHS. Hold on. Okay, maybe I evaluate the LHS first and the ID first, and then the RHS. In any case, the ID is not going to cause any side effects. So it doesn't really matter in this particular case in which order we evaluate. And so I evaluate X first. So X is going to evaluate based on the environment and the store. And so for that, I'm going to use my rule for ID. And in that case, I'm going to say, oh, what does E map X to? So E maps X to LX, location X, LX. And S maps LX to zero. And so the variable X evaluates to zero, S. All right. If you recall, the assignment rule that we had did not actually specify, did not really require us to evaluate X, but we are doing that anyway in this particular evaluation. So let's say it also wanted us to do that as well. And then we look at the RHS of the assignment, which in this case is seven plus five, under the updated store. So what's the updated store? It's just S, it hasn't really changed. And so we are going to use the updated store. So that's the new updated store S here. And what does seven plus five evaluate to? Well, I'm going to use my addition rule and my constant rules to find out that seven plus five values to 12, and it does not update the store S. Okay. Finally, now that I have these two rules set up, I know that the assignment should evaluate to the RHS of the assignment, which is 12, and it should update the store S so that it puts a mapping of 12 to X. So that's my next step. So X colon equals seven plus five is going to evaluate to 12, S prime, where S prime is everything that was S except that LX should now be mapped to 12. And so S prime will be S except that LX is replaced by 12. And so that's what S prime is going to look like. And so X, the assignment basically evaluates to 12, S prime. And now I have the S prime under which four should be evaluated. So I basically put S prime here, right? And then I get four, S prime because four is just a constant. It doesn't really change the store and the value returned is also four. And so finally, this particular expression is just going to return whatever is the RHS of the semicolon operator, which is four comma S prime. And recall that S prime is nothing but a store that maps LX to 12. Now, before I finish, I want to clarify on the semantics of the assignment operator. So actually in my previous rule that we had discussed for the assignment operator, let's revisit it again. In this, I had used ID colon equal E as my syntax on which I was doing pattern matching. But in general, it is possible in a CC++ language to have a more general form of assignment. For example, I could have E1 colon equals E2, all right? Where E1 is also a general expression. And this is useful, for example, to say things like star X colon equals four, right? Here, star X is not an ID. It is a general expression. It involves the dereference operator and things like that. And so the evaluation of E1 could also potentially have side effects. And so our language will need to define what is the order in which these side effects should be applied. And typically the order would be that you first evaluate the side effects of the LHS, and then you evaluate the side effects of the RHS. However, in this particular rule, I'm assuming that the assignments are only being done to an identifier and not to a general expression. And so we didn't really have to worry about the side effects of the LHS in this particular rule. And so while I was actually discussing this example, you know, I made a slight deviation because I started evaluating the LHS of the assignment, which is also okay. And that is actually for a more general version of the assignment rule. I should point out that while in our custom language that looks like C, C++, we are defining the order of evaluation very deterministically. For example, we are always pretty much evaluating the left operand before the right operand and so on. A language like C and C++ actually leaves the order of evaluation unspecified. And that's a much longer topic of discussion. And I would point you to a paper which discusses this order of evaluation semantics of C and C++ in the comment section of this video.
