Title: Compiler Design Module 148 : Simple Code Generation Strategy for Synchronization Free Parallelism
Video ID: aMT4XyJQJQM
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

We have now discussed the space partitioning constraints. We have also identified the method to solve those constraints. At the end of all this, we basically, for a given program or a loop nest, we basically get a map for every statement from its iteration space to the processor space. This is using, for example, for statement si, it is given by capital CI matrix and small ci additive vector. Now, once we have these functions from iterations of different statements to processor IDs, what do I do with them? It's not enough. We haven't really finished the whole thing. The remaining part is basically to transform the program so that it becomes parallel or it exploits locality better or things like that. Recall that when we motivated this whole idea of space partitioning constraints, we were interested in what is called synchronization-free parallelism. So we are interested in identifying data parallelism so that different iterations of the loop can be mapped to different processors, number one. Number two, even if the number of processors is smaller or maybe there's only one processor, the transformation basically ensures that all the iterations that are independent are in the outer loops and all the iterations that are data dependent are in the inner loops. In other words, these transformations decrease the reuse distance between data dependencies. So this is meaningful from locality perspective as well on a single processor. So we have to do all these transformations now, given that we have a solution, the maximum rank solution for these functions that are represented by capital C and small c values. These are fine functions. How do I now change the program so that it is either parallel or it has better locality? So for example, we have this S1, S2, these are two different statements. These dots in these sets basically indicate all the iteration points of S1 and S2, and these are functions that are mapping these iteration points to the processor IDs. So these are two different function. Let's say this was my original program. So now I want to change this program based on these functions such that it looks different. So for example, I could say that for us, let's say this was a two-dimensional processor space. Maybe from S1 and S2, I got a two-dimensional processor space. Then the two dimensions of the processor space, PID, is going to be let's say P1 and P2. So P1 for one dimension and P2 for the other dimension. Now we can have an outer loop which is iterating over one dimension of the processor space, and then I can have an inner loop which is iterating on the other dimension of the processor space. So for P1 equals some lower bound to some upper bound, for P2 equals some lower bound to some upper bound, and then I have some code which basically ultimately executes S1 and S2. And so basically, all these outer iterations like the outermost loop on P1 is going to be completely embarrassingly parallel or data parallel because I know that this is by design that different iterations of the outer loop would have different values of P1. And so that means in a parallel machine, they could have been mapped to different processors. And so they must not have had any data dependency because that was our original formulation of the problem. Similarly for the inner processor loop as well. And then whatever is inside, that may have data dependency. So that's what I mean. In this case, the transformation looks like it is for locality on a single processor. But I could, for example, you know, just suffix parallel on the top four loops and this would become a parallel for loop. The top two loops, the outer two loops would become parallel for loops and they will become amenable for parallelization on a parallel machine. So this whole step is called code generation and basically we are calling this generating the code for a given space partition. So we already have a space partition which is characterized by all these solutions that we have obtained, capital C, small c. And now given these solutions, I need to generate the codes either on a parallel machine or on a sequential machine such that I improve the parallelism and or locality. Okay, so let's take an example to understand what we're going to do. Also, I want to say that in this module, I'm just going to discuss a very simple code generation strategy and it may not look very optimized. In fact, it may look worse than the original program but slowly we are going to improve that to get our best possible solution which are going to look much better than what the original program was. So here is the original program by way of an example. Once again, I'm going to use this as a running example similar to the example that I've been using all through while even discussing the space partitioning constraints. So I have for i equals zero to 100, for j equals zero to 100, xij equals xij plus yi minus one j and yij equals yij plus xij minus one. And this first statement is called S1 and the second statement is called S2 and they can be mapped independently provided I can do different processes provided I respect the data dependencies. And we have already solved these kinds of problems and let's say I have my solution. The solution that I have is capital C1 is a rank one matrix. That means it has one row, one linearly independent row and it has one minus one and small c1 which is the additive vector is minus one. Capital C2 again, one minus one and small c2 is zero. In other words, for S1, for iteration i comma j of S1, it is going to be mapped to the processor ID P. So processor space is only a one dimensional space because these capital Cs are uni-dimensional. And so P equals i minus j minus one represents the ID of the processor at which S1 is going, the i comma j iteration of S1 is going to run. So for example, if it was the one comma one iteration of S1, then it's going to run on processor ID minus one. All right, similarly for S2, the P function is P equals i minus j. So for example, if it was one comma one, then it's going to run on processor ID zero. So one comma one of S1 will run on a different processor ID and one comma one of S2 is going to run on a different processor ID. And this is a part of our solution, of our maximum rank solution and yet it satisfies all the data dependencies as we have already discussed before. Now, once I have this, how do I kind of go around transforming this program? And I'm going to transform the program for as though it looks like a uni-processor program. But as I showed in the previous slide, I can always put parallel for loops instead of sequential for loops at the outer loops, which are iterating over different dimensions of the P to basically make it a parallel program as well. So it doesn't really matter whether I'm generating code for a sequential program or a sequential machine or a parallel machine. The code generated is going to look very similar. It's just a matter of changing a sequential for to a parallel for on the outer loops. Okay, so now this is what my, here's my very simple code generation strategy. I iterate over all the processor ID. So what are my processor IDs? Well, P is a single dimensional processor ID. So there'll be only one nested for loop. In my first slide that I showed, I had P1 and P2 because I was assuming that PID is two dimensional. But in this particular example, the solution that I got was one dimensional. So I will have an outer for loop, which is only a single for loop, not two for loops or anything like that. And the only one dimension P is going to iterate from some lower bound to some upper bound. And we're going to discuss how we get these lower bounds and upper bounds. And after that, I just basically, it's basically it's iterating over different processors. And by the way, I could have put a parallel for loop here as well. Okay, that's fine. I mean, so again, you know, it doesn't matter whether I'm generating code for a sequential machine or a parallel machine. But after that, what do I do? Well, here is the simple code generation strategy, which is not very efficient. As I said, we're going to make it more efficient in our successive modules, but at least it should be correct. And here is what we are going to do. We're just going to paste the entire program here as it is, okay? So, you know, all these statements that you see in light brown are basically just taken as it is verbatim from the original program. So for i equals zero, i is less than equal to 100, i plus plus, that's just coming from here. For j equals zero, j is less than equal to 100, j plus plus, that's also coming from here. And now I have all the statements or whatever the statements are, right? So the only change that I will make is that whenever I come across a statement, let's say S1 or S2, then I'm going to prefix it or predicate it with an if statement, which basically says that execute this iteration of the statement only if it matches the corresponding processor ID, or it was mapped to the corresponding processor ID. So notice that what is the outer for loop saying? The outer for loop saying is, it's saying that I'm currently executing on the pth processor, right? Whatever is the processor ID space. So I'm currently executing on the pth processor. And so we only want to execute those iterations of S1, which were mapped to this particular value of p, right? And so how do I find out what are all those values, what are all those iterations that were mapped to this fixed value of small p? Well, that's exactly the function that we had identified for S1, right? Which is p equals i minus j minus one. So we can prefix it with exactly that predicate, is that if p equals i minus j minus one, only then execute it, otherwise don't execute anything. So that's basically saying that execute the statement only if I am on the correct processor, right? For this particular iteration. So that's what this prefixing means. It says if p equals i minus j minus one, then execute S1. Similarly, I have a similar rule for S2. So I just paste S2 as it is, except that I also predicate it with if p equals i minus j. Notice that the function, the mapping function for S2 is different from S1. And so while, and so the checks, the predicates themselves are also different. In one case, we are checking against i minus j minus one, because that's what the function was. And in the other case, I was checking for i minus j. Now I want to kind of just complete the discussion by saying that if it was a two dimensional processor space, then I would have had two outer loops, p1 and p2. And my predicate would have been if p1 equals some function of i comma j and p2 equals some function of i comma j, all right? So basically I will execute that iteration of the statement only if I'm on the correct p1 comma p2 pair. In other words, I'm on the correct processor. And so that's exactly what we are doing in this example as well. So now there are two remaining questions here. One is what is, so one of the important remaining questions here is what, how do I identify what is the lower bound of p and upper bound of p? And this is, in this case, this is only a single dimension of the processor space. If I had a two dimensional processor space, then I would have had to identify the upper bound and lower bound for each of the p1, p2 and so on, right? So in this case, there's only one dimension. So I need to basically identify the lower bound and upper bound for that particular dimension. In this case, I've already given you a solution from, it should be from minus 100 to 99. How do I figure this out? Well, here is a hint. We basically use the Fourier mode scan method to figure this out. And we have already discussed that this is basically just like the changing the axis method in Fourier mode scan, okay? The other question is how do I figure out what is, what are these predicates that I should use? And I've already discussed that these predicates are coming exactly from the mapping functions for the corresponding respective statements. For S1, the mapping function was I minus J minus one. So that's what I'm going to use as a predicate. For S2, it was I minus J. So that's what I'm going to use as a predicate. So now here is the, given that we understand, so this is the solution that I'm going to discuss for code generation. My first point here is that this transformation from here to here is correct, okay? It's not, it doesn't look very pretty in the sense that it's not efficient, but it is correct. And so we're going to at least start from a correct solution where all the parallel threads are at the top level. And then I can kind of parallelize the top level loop. But now, and later I'm going to discuss in the subsequent modules how to make this more efficient as well. Okay, so right now it doesn't look very efficient. All right, so here is the algorithm sketch. We will generate outer loops for PID with depth equal to max rank of the coefficient matrix Ci across all statements Si. So if there are five statements, then we'll have five different capital CIs, the coefficients matrices. And then whichever has the maximum rank, that's the one that we basically going to use as the rank of PID. And that is the number of loops that I'm going to create. So in my example, that value was just one. But if you have two, then you're going to create two nested loops for P1 equals something, for P2 equals something. If there was five, then you're going to create five different loops and so on. So you're going to generate these outer loops and these outer loops are going to be parallel loops if there was a parallel machine, okay? Then I'm going to identify lower and upper bounds for each dimension of the PID. So just like we identify minus 199 or whatever for P, if there was P1, P2, then I need to identify similarly the lower bound for P1 and the lower upper bound of P1 and lower bound and upper bound of P2. And how do I do this? Well, here is a simple idea. You do this for each statement separately. So for every statement, we already have the iteration space and we have the mapping function from the iteration space to the processor space. And so from that, we have the bounds for the iteration space. For example, I is greater than or equal to zero and I is less than or equal to 100. Similarly, J is greater than or equal to zero, J is less than or equal to 100. And now we have a function that says P equals I minus J minus one. So I can use the Fourier mode scan method to identify what are the lower and upper bounds for P from the lower and upper bounds of I and J. And this is just our idea of eliminating some variables. So for example, I'm going to project on P, this space, this polyhedral space that is formed by I comma J between zero and 100. I'm going to project this polyhedral space on the third dimension P, which is using the identity P equals I minus J minus one or P equals I minus J or whatever. And notice that because these relations between P and I comma J may be different for different statements, each statement separately. And one of the properties of this is that, because it was a polyhedral space, a projection of a polyhedral space will also be polyhedral. This is something that we had discussed for poly, when we were discussing the Fourier mode scan method. And so the projection for every single statement will be polyhedral. It will be convex and it will be polyhedral. But now I will take the union of all these convex polyhedral spaces or I'm also calling them convex ranges to get one convex range. So for example, if for S1 I get P1 is from minus one to five and for S2 I get P goes from seven to 10, then I just take the lowest bound, which is minus one and the upper bound, which is 10 and just iterate over that. And it doesn't really matter because after all, you're only going to execute S1 and S2 when the corresponding Ps are being matched because you're already predicating them with that. So we just want to find the lower and upper bounds. So notice that when you take the union of all the convex ranges. So I just gave you an example, minus three to five and seven to 10. When I take the union, it doesn't look convex. It's no longer polyhedral because it's two different ranges that I want to take union of. But now I just create a larger polyhedron that just because the space between five and seven wasn't actually part of the union, but now I just kind of extrapolated so that it becomes convex and still remains a polyhedron. And so that's what I'm going to do. It doesn't really matter, as I said earlier. If I add more points to P, it is only going to make my program less efficient because I'm going to iterate more unnecessarily. But at the end of the day, it's not going to make it incorrect because anyway, the execution of any of the statements is predicated based on the value of P anyways. So we take the union of all convex ranges to get one convex range in the outer loop. Okay, now, and finally, we paste the original program after predicating each statement so that only the desired statement iteration indices are executed for a given PID index. So that's exactly if P1 equals some function of i, j and P2 equals some function of i, j only then execute S1, all right? In our previous example, there was only one P. So P equals i minus j minus one. And so that's what predicating is. And so this is going to be a code generation strategy. Once again, it's not very efficient, but it is correct. Okay, so just want to solve this for this example, just to, this is the Fourier mod-skin method to identify the bounds, but maybe you have forgotten it. So let's try to do this again for this particular example. So recall that P equals i minus j minus one for S1. So I'm going to do this separately for every statement. So I first do for S1. So P equals i minus j minus one for S1. i is between zero and 100, j is between zero and 100. So what does it tell me about P? Well, if you recall, basically in Fourier mod-skin, I take an inequality. So I want to project on i, right? So I basically take an inequality and which is less than equal to and another inequality is greater than equal to and kind of put them together by getting rid of the middle element, which was the one I wanted to project out. So here is what I get. For example, when I say i is less than equal to 100, first of all, the first thing I do is I replace, I kind of do Gaussian elimination using this equality to just get, just rewrite i in terms of P. So I have P plus j plus one between zero and 100 and j between zero and 100. P plus j plus one is just a rewrite of i. And now basically I have this polyhedral space between P and j instead of i and j, but now I want to project out j. So how do I project out j? Well, I get inequalities which are, which basically express j between, j is less than equal to something and j is greater than equal to something and then kind of combine them. That's a Fourier mode scan method. So example, if I combine j is greater than equal to zero with P plus j plus one is less than equal to 100, I get, if I project out j from here from these two inequalities, this diagonal relation saying that take less than from here and greater than from there, I get j is greater than equal to zero, P plus j plus one is less than equal to 100. So j is greater than zero. So it must be true that P plus one is less than equal to 100, right? Because j is greater than zero and P plus j plus one is less than equal to 100. So I get P plus one is less than equal to 100 or P is less than equal to 99. So from S1, I got P is less than equal to 99. So that's one of the upper bounds that I got for S1. Similarly, if I take these, the other diagonal, I get and I project out j, I get P plus j plus one is greater than equal to zero and j is less than equal to 100. So that basically gives me P plus 101 is greater than equal to zero because that's the maximum value that j can take. And so that, you know, this P plus j plus one is greater than equal to zero and j is less than equal to 100 gives me P plus 101 is always greater than equal to zero. I just projected out j there as well. And that gives me P is greater than equal to minus 101. So minus 101 is the lower bound now for P and 99 is the upper bound for P for when I'm talking about S1. So I already got a range, which is a convex range, which is minus 101, 99. And this is a convex polyhedron because projection of a convex polyhedron is always a convex polyhedron as well. But this is just for S1, okay? Now I want to also do the same thing for S2. And so first of all, you know, I just circled this. So these are the constraints that I got for S1 which P is less than equal to 99 and P is greater than equal to minus 101. Now I take S2 where P equals i minus j and once again, the iteration indices have constraints, i is between zero and 100 and j is between zero and 100. And once again, I kind of project out, first I do caution elimination on i and then I project out j. And that gives, so this gives me P, caution elimination gives me P plus j between zero and 100 and j between zero and 100. And now I project out j using Fourier-Moyle skin and that gives me P is less than equal to 100 and P is greater than equal to minus 100. I haven't shown the working but you can check it for yourself. So I've got two sets of iterations, spaces, two kinds of sets of convex ranges. One is P is between minus 100 and 100, the other is P is between minus 101 and 99. What should I do? I should take the union of these two, all right? And when I take the union of these two, I'm going to get minus 101 to 100. And so that's what I get. I get P is between minus 101 and 100. And if the union was non-convex, in this case it happens to be convex, but if the union was non-convex, then I just create, I just find one union which is convex and which contains each of these things. It's the smallest union that is convex, which contains all these things. For a unidimensional thing, we basically talking, saying that we just basically find the lower bound, the least of the lower bounds across all these statements and the maximum of the upper bounds across all these statements, if it was a single dimensional polyhedron. I want to point out that even if you get this wrong, for example, if you do more iterations, for example, if I iterate from minus 200 to plus 200, the program remains correct, although it becomes less efficient because it remains correct because anyway I'm not going to execute S1 until it matches my condition for P. Okay, now, so this is my generated code. Finally, for P equals minus 101 to 100, for I equals zero to 100, for J equals zero to 100 predicated statements for S1 and S2 predicated by their corresponding mapping functions if P equals I minus J minus one and if P equals I minus J. Once again, this is not very efficient. I want to find out that these values that I have here are actually different from the ones that I had in my first slide. So my example on my first slide was actually slightly incorrect because it wasn't counting all the iterations but that's okay. This is the correct solution and we basically have a correct code where the outer loop is parallel. Well, the outer loop is parallel but I mean the inner kind of body of each iteration is very expensive. In fact, I've made it more expensive than before so it's not very satisfying but we're going to fix that in our subsequent modules. The important thing is that this is correct. In other words, the program that I've generated, the code that I've generated is equivalent to the code of the original unoptimized program.
