Title: Compiler Design Module 29 : Structure of Viable Prefixes
Video ID: kPuxx5ESSCk
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

So far, we have learned about what is bottom-up passing. It's about tracing the rightmost derivation in reverse. We have also talked about what a shift-reduce parser is. It involves two types of moves, shift and reduce. We looked at what are handles. We said a handle is a state of the stack where we should reduce. In other words, in a rightmost derivation, it is exactly the place where there was a derivation that was done, where there was a production that was applied. And then we said, what is a viable prefix? Viable prefix is any potential state of the stack in a valid parse of a string if one exists. Actually, if you think about it, we haven't said much about how we're going to parse yet. We've talked about shift-reduce parsing, which is nice, but we haven't really said how to decide whether to shift or reduce. We've just been defining a couple of terms. For example, we defined what's a handle, and then we defined what's a viable prefix. Neither of these things are actually, we haven't really said how to find whether something is a handle, or how to find whether something is a viable prefix. We just said, if it is a handle, we should reduce. Or we said, if it produces a viable prefix, then we should perform that action. And for an unambiguous grammar, there's a unique parse tree. And further, there is a unique right-most derivation for any given string, if one exists. And so, it's easy to figure out, if I'm able to identify the derivation, then identifying the handles from the derivation is pretty easy. But if I don't know the derivation, then figuring out what is the handle or what is the viable prefix, that is still, we haven't thought about it yet. We also said that actually it is not possible, in general, to identify what is a handle or what is not, unless you basically know the derivation already. And if you know the derivation already, you already have been able to parse it anyway. So the question is, how do we identify what is a handle or what is a viable prefix? And we also said that, okay, let's categorize grammar and say that there's some grammars where we will be able to identify the handles using this algorithm. Some other grammars for which we will not be able to identify the handles or the viable prefix using this algorithm, but maybe some other algorithm. For example, we said LR0, SLR, LALR, and so on. Okay, we haven't yet studied these algorithms, we just said that, okay, this is how we can categorize grammar and some grammars will be possible using some algorithm because you will be able to identify precisely what is a handle and what is not. So today we're going to try to attempt to identify what is a viable prefix, okay, efficiently, without actually knowing the derivation itself. And to do that, we're going to make some observations on the structure of viable prefixes. So recall that if there is a step in a rightmost derivation or a shift-reduced parse where we have alpha, omega, such that the cursor is placed between alpha and omega, then alpha is known as the viable prefix. Now the observation that I'm making now is that alpha, which is the viable prefix, is made of prefixes of the RHS of the productions. Okay, so if I look at this grammar, which is a canonical grammar of expressions, then any viable prefix should look like the following. It should have bits and pieces of the RHS of the production because after all it is just a prefix of some rightmost derivation. So any rightmost derivation would look like the following. It would have some prefix of some production, and then for the next non-terminal, it would have the prefix of its production and so on, and this would keep going on. So for example, if you look at this particular string, t plus int star t, then here I could think of this as a combination of a couple of prefixes of productions. For example, t plus is coming from the first production t plus, and then int star t is probably coming from this production t produces int star t. So it's a combination of prefixes of some productions. Okay, so to see it more concretely, possibly t plus int star t, the first part of this prefix is coming from this production e produces t plus e, and so the first part of it is available, but capital E has been expanded further, and so the other part of it is probably coming from, the first thing I want to do probably is to produce t from e, and then produce int star t from t, and so if I look at it, it becomes t plus int star t. So in general, a viable prefix would be formed by a combination or by concatenation of prefixes of zero or more productions of the grammar. And we saw this in this example. So in general, this would always be the structure of a viable prefix, and once again, this property is coming from the fact that it's a rightmost derivation. So it would have some prefix one, prefix two, prefix three, dot, dot, dot, such that each prefix i is a prefix of the RHS of a production, and here I'm showing n prefixes. Moreover, when prefix n becomes complete, we will reduce it. So let's say the prefix n is some incomplete prefix of some production, but the moment it becomes complete, which means the entire RHS starts showing up there, then we replace it by the LHS of that production, and now prefix n minus one gets modified because another symbol, another non-terminal symbol gets appended to prefix n minus one to give you prefix prime n minus one. So prefix n minus one gets changed to prefix prime n minus one, and this keeps happening, right? Okay, so that's what the structure of a viable prefix looks like. So here is an example. So we already looked at this idea that t plus int star t is a viable prefix, and that it is formed by two parts. One is a prefix of the production t plus c, and the other is the prefix of the production t produces int star t. And now it can reduce to another viable prefix, which is t plus t. And once again, I can kind of, what I've done is this was a prefix n in my previous slide, and now this has reduced to a single non-terminal t. And still, I mean, this still represents a prefix of some RHS. And in this case, the RHS is of the production, e produces t, which is just producing a single symbol t in the RHS. And finally, this can actually further reduce to t plus e. So in this case, what's happening is t is reducing to e, and now prefix n minus one, which in this case is the first prefix, now becomes t plus e. So instead of two different prefixes, now I'm left with a single prefix. And eventually, this is going to reduce to e. So this is what a structure of a viable prefix will look like. So important fact number three, and this comes from some of the discussion that we already had, is that for any grammar, the set of viable prefixes is a regular language, okay? So this may sound a little surprising because we are kind of introducing the idea of how can the prefix, viable prefix of a context-free grammar represent a regular language. Well, it's easy to see because a viable prefix, as we just discussed, is formed by concatenating zero or more prefixes of the RHS of the productions, right? So any viable prefix is basically formed by concatenating zero or more prefixes of productions. And because there's a finite number of productions, we can kind of construct a regular language to represent the set of viable prefixes. So for example, the set of viable prefixes for this grammar, S produces epsilon or left open brackets, capital S, right broken open brackets, which is basically the grammar of all palance parentheses. Then we have the set of viable prefixes for this is either epsilon or some zero or more sequences of the open bracket, or zero or more sequences of the open bracket followed by capital S, or zero or more occurrences of the open bracket followed by one occurrence of open bracket, capital S, closed bracket. So notice that I'm just constructing the set of viable prefixes by just looking at the grammar and saying, what are all the possible combinations that are possible here, right? So I could either just use epsilon, or I could use epsilon, and epsilon we have before, anything doesn't make sense. So I'm going to look at the second production. So either I could use some number of the open brackets or some number of open brackets, because I could use the first open bracket, which is the first prefix, and then another one. So open bracket star is going to look like this, and each of them is going to be a separate prefix, isn't it? Each of a separate production, and eventually it may get reduced to fewer number of prefixes and so on. Or it could be open bracket star S or open bracket star, open bracket capital S, closed bracket. Or if I want to represent it as a regular expression, it's going to look something like this. Open bracket star, the cleanie star plus, which is the union operator, or open bracket star capital S or open bracket plus, which represents one or more occurrences of the open bracket, capital S, closed bracket. So this regular expression represents the language of all viable prefixes for this context-free grammar. Okay, an item. So now I'm going to define another concept, which is basically based on this notion that a viable prefix is formed by concatenating prefixes of productions, one or more, zero or more productions. And to basically represent that, to represent the fact that, to represent a prefix of a production, I'm going to define the notion of an item. An item is a production with a dot somewhere in the RHS, right? So for example, these are the items for this production T produces parenthesized E. So the first item is dot is on the leftmost point. The second item involves the dot, just after the left parenthesis. The third item is after E, and the fourth item is on the very right. And these different items are basically kind of representing what is the point, how much of the prefix is present in the viable prefix, for example. That's what we want to really represent. I want to say, okay, maybe, if this is the item that we are using, then the first open parenthesis is in the viable prefix, and then there is some other thing. So what part of the production is in the viable prefix and what part is not? Okay, so we're going to represent a viable prefix as a stack of items. So recall that we used this example of T plus int star T, and we're going to kind of represent this as a stack of items. We already said that it is a concatenation of prefixes of productions. So what are the productions and what are the prefixes? Those are going to get represented by our items. So in this case, the three items that are going to represent this particular viable prefix is, are E produces T plus dot. So that basically means that the T plus part of it goes into the viable prefix. The second production is E produces dot T, which means that the epsilon here goes into the prefix, which means nothing goes into the prefix. It's an empty string. And then the third production is T produces int star T dot, which means this entire thing goes into the prefix. So the viable prefix is formed by T plus epsilon int star T, which basically means T plus int star T. Okay, so viable prefix can be represented as a stack of items. And reading backwards, the LHS of, so reading backwards, which means if I read this stack bottom to top, then the LHS of every item is the next symbol in the RHS of the previous item. So it's not just true that the viable prefixes, a viable prefix is formed by concatenating the prefixes of productions. There's also a pattern to which prefixes are used or which productions are used. And the pattern is the following, that if I look, read backwards, then if I look at the LHS of this, then this is what is following dot in the previous one. And that makes sense, because that's what we are expanding. So these two match, okay? Similarly, this is the LHS of the second production, and this is what follows the dot in the first production, okay? So that's another property of this stack of items, that the LHS of every item is the next symbol. By next symbol, I mean the symbol that just follows the dot pointer in the RHS of the previous item, okay? So in other words, this stack of items basically says that we have seen T plus of E produces T plus E, we have seen epsilon of E produces dot T, and we have seen int star T of T produces int star T, okay? All right, so every viable prefix can be represented as a stack of items where the N plus 1th item is a production for a non-terminal that follows the dot in the Nth item, and we already seen this with an example. So the algorithm idea is the following. To recognize viable prefix, we will try to recognize a sequence of partial RHSs of productions, and each partial RHS can eventually reduce to part of the missing suffix of its predecessor, okay? So we are going to try to develop an algorithm to recognize these viable prefixes. So in any step of our shift-reduce parsing, we are going to consult this automaton that will implement the regular language of viable prefixes, and we will check whether this is a viable prefix or not based on this automaton, whether this could be a viable prefix for any string for this particular automaton. What does that mean? Well, if it is a viable prefix, then it has hope of getting reduced all the way to the start symbol. If it is not a viable prefix, then it has no hope of getting reduced to the start symbol. So at every step, we can check whether there is any hope of getting reduced to the start symbol or not. If there is hope, we can continue on that path. Hopefully, there are not multiple paths on which there is hope. If there are, then we'll have to deal with it, and we'll see how we deal with it. On the other hand, if there is no hope for a viable, which means that if I do this, then I don't end up with a viable prefix. In other words, this cannot be a viable prefix for any string, then we can just say that, okay, this is not a valid answer. In other words, in a shift-reduce parser, we can see, now we have to make a distinction, a choice between shift or reduce. We can say, if I shift, the stuff that I get, is it going to be a, does it have hope to be a viable prefix or not? And we can conserve this automaton to figure out whether it can be a viable prefix or not. What is that? I'm saying that I can use an automaton to figure out whether it could be a viable prefix or not because I have already established that the language of viable prefixes is a regular language. Okay, so to recognize viable prefixes, I'll recognize a sequence of partial RHSs of the productions, okay? And that's a regular language. Each partial RHS can eventually reduce to part of the missing suffix of its predecessor. So hoping that each of them can eventually reduce all the way to the start symbol.
