Title: Compiler Design Module 142 : Space Partition Constraints
Video ID: rKQP80V3OaA
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

So, last time we were talking about how we can partition the iteration space such that each partition is basically mapped to a single processor and we also call these space partition constraints because we are partitioning the iteration space into different processors or another space. And so, for any given statement s, there is an iteration space and notice that if there are two statements or four statements, there will be four different iteration spaces depending on the loop nest depth at which they belong. Also, when I say a statement, I am really talking about a three address code statement. In other words, a statement involves a memory access, a static memory access. So, for example, if it is a C statement, then I am going to divide it into multiple three-axis code statements. So, for every statement s, there is an iteration space that is characterized by b i plus b 0 and then there is a processor space which is a k-dimensional space. So, if my iteration space was an l-dimensional space, my processor space is a k-dimensional space where k is less than or equal to l and then there is a function that maps points in the iteration space to points in the processor space. And if this is an affine function, then it can be represented as c i plus c and in other words, the processor ID, given iteration vector i, the corresponding processor vector or PID which is formed by a k-duple P1, P2, P3 dot dot dot Pk can be formed by just applying this function, first multiplying i with capital C and then adding small c. So, the function itself because it is an affine function can be characterized by a coefficient net matrix capital C and an addition matrix small c, a constant matrix, a constant vector small c. And notice that capital C comma small c are different for every statement s. So, for example, if my program has three statements, then there is C1, capital C1, small c1, capital C2, small c2 and capital C3, small c3 for s1, s2, s3 respectively. And so, in the best case, assuming all these three statements were completely parallel and data independent, then each of them can be mapped, each iteration of each of them can be mapped to a separate processor. And so, that's the motivation of having separate capital C and small c for every statement. However, if there are data dependencies, then we need some constraints on capital C and small c. Okay, and what are those constraints and what would they look like? That is the subject of this question in this particular module. Now, I want to first point out before we move on is that we are basically constraining this mapping function from iteration space to processor space by an affine function. But it is not necessary that this is just a constraint that we have assumed because it makes our solution possible easier to solve. But there are many other variations to this. For example, I could say, oh, it could be any arbitrary function. But then we have to work in a framework that is not necessarily the polyhedral framework because polyhedral framework involves affine relations typically. All right. Here's another relaxation. Instead of the whole function being affine, maybe it's a piecewise affine function. So let's say the function is smaller. It takes an input iteration vector i. And then if for a certain range of values of i, it has capital C1, small c1. For another range of values of i, it has capital C2, small c2, and so on. And so this is a piecewise linear function. Because if capital C1 and C2 and small c1 and small c2 are different, then I basically divided the iteration space into two parts, which are basically represented by these constraints R1, small r1, capital R2, small r2, assuming that these are not overlapping regions. The regions represented by these constraints are not overlapping, in which case basically what I have is a piecewise linear function. So if it belongs to this range, then this is the processor ID. If it belongs to this range, then this is the processor ID. And so it's no longer a fine function. It's a piecewise affine function where the different pieces can have different affine functions. And a piecewise affine function still can be often solved using a polyhedral framework. It can potentially give you better solutions than a completely affine function like we had in our previous slide. But we are going to restrict our discussion to affine functions only because they basically give us the maximum bang for the buck. They give us the maximum returns for the amount of effort and the expensiveness of the computation, the cost of the computation that we have to do to do such transformations. But it's good to know that to understand this nature of the constraint of a fine function versus a more general function like a piecewise affine function. Now let's come back to our original discussion. So if we have a fine function, it can be characterized by a single pair of matrix vector pairs, capital C and small c. And we need to find a solution to capital C and small c that satisfies the data dependence constraints. If there are no data dependencies whatsoever, then these should be as liberal as possible. For example, they can just map every iteration of every statement to a different processor. But we need to also consider the data dependence constraints. Now we already have mathematical formulations of what it means for two statements or two iterations to have a data dependence. And we are going to thus combine that mathematical formulation with the problem of finding capital C, small c so that we are able to find the solution that both satisfies the data dependence constraints and maximizes the amount of parity. So first of all, notice that when I say we need to find a solution to capital C, small c, a trivial solution that will always work is that capital C is the zero matrix and small c is the zero vector. In this case, let's just say that capital C has a single row. So the processor space is a unidimensional space. It's a single dimension, k is 1, and the first row is just 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, which basically means that everything is mapping to just one processor in the processor space. In other words, the dimension of the processor space actually is 0, not even 1. And small c is also 0. It's just an additive constant to basically separate out different spaces. And so both of them are 0. So basically all the iterations map to processor number 0, which means I have no parallelism, and that is a valid solution that will satisfy any data dependence constraints. But that's not a very useful solution. So firstly, why is this a solution? Well, if every iteration is mapped to the same processor, assuming that two iterations are mapped to the same processor, we are going to have some way of preserving their relative order vis-a-vis the original program. We're going to discuss how to do that later on. But if everything is mapped to the same processor, it basically means the program has remained unchanged. We haven't really parallelized anything. We haven't identified any parallelism in the loop. In other words, the degree of parallelism in the output loop nest would be exactly 0. And this is a trivial solution, and this would work for any iteration space to a processor space. But we are interested in maximizing the processor space. In other words, we are interested in a solution for capital C and small c that basically has as large a range as possible for this affine function. So the larger the range of the affine function that we find, the larger the amount of parallelism we have been able to discover. How do I ensure that... What is the other way of saying that the range of this function should be maximum? The other way to say that the range of this function should be maximum is saying that the dimension of the processor space should be as large as possible. And that's one reason why we have represented our processor space also as a k-dimensional space. So we want as large k as possible, so that the larger the k, the more the parallelism. In other words, when will the value of k be large? When capital C would have the number of linearly independent rows in capital C is the maximum. In other words, C is a matrix that the solution should have. It should be a solution that maximizes the rank of the coefficient matrix capital C. We are going to see this more with examples. But notice that the rank of this particular matrix is just zero and that's not very meaningful. Although this is a trivial solution that would satisfy the data dependence constraints, it gives us no parallelism whatsoever. So really what we are interested in is a solution that maximizes the range of the function, in other words, maximizes the rank of the coefficient matrix because that is going to give us the maximum parallelism while satisfying the data dependence constraints. So further I want to point out that this is just a capital C, small c solution for one S. So for different S's we will have different solutions. And we want to maximize the rank of capital C for each of these statements so that each of these statements can be mapped to as large a range as possible to exploit maximum parallelism. And what is an affine partition? An affine partition involves identifying these capital C, small c pairs for every statement. So if there are three statements then I need to identify what is C1, capital C1, small c1, capital C2, small c2 and capital C3, small c3. And once I have identified all these three such that their ranks are maximum, I have basically identified the best possible parallelization solution for this particular program or loop list. Okay, so now let's come to the question of how do I say, how do I basically encode my data dependence constraints under this framework and formulate this problem of finding the maximum rank capital C, small c so that we maximize the parallelism. Well, here is the general structure of what we are going to do. We are interested in finding an affine partition. Recall that an affine partition is not just one capital C and small c. It is a list of capital C, small c, one for each statement. And we say an affine partition is synchronization free. So we are interested in finding an affine partition that is synchronization free. Which basically means that using this affine partition, if iteration 1 is mapped to processor 0 and iteration 2 is mapped to processor 1, then these iterations do not need to synchronize at all. They can proceed in parallel. There needs to be no ordering constraints between the two processors. And that's what I mean by synchronization free. And in our current discussion, we are only discussing synchronization free parallel. So we will map two iterations on these different processors only if we are 100% sure that they don't need to be synchronized. And one way to be 100% sure that they don't need to be synchronized is if they don't have a data dependence. If those two dynamic instances of iterations don't have a data dependence, then they don't need to be synchronized. And so we are interested in synchronization free parallelism. I have not been using the word synchronization free all through. I have just been saying parallelism, parallelism. But really what I really meant was synchronization free parallelism and I have been making it more precise and concrete in this sentence. So an affine partition is synchronization free if and only if for every two not necessarily distinct statements, f1, small f1, capital B1, small b1, f2, small f2, capital B2, small b2. Notice that every statement in my program can be represented by a four-tuple in my polynomial framework. So let's say one is represented by number one. So f1, small f1, b1, small b1. And the other is f2, small f2, b2, small b2. And notice the phrase is not necessarily distinct. It's possible that it's the same statement that we are talking about in which case capital F2 would be equal to small f1, capital F2 would be, small f2 would be equal to small f1 and small f2. So an affine partition is synchronization free if and only if for every two statements, the corresponding capital C1, small c1, that means the corresponding affine functions for each statement are, and they have some constraints, right? So depending on what are capital F1 and small f1, depending on what is capital B1 and small b1, depending on what is capital F2 and small f2, and what is capital B2 and small b2, and notice that these can be the same actually, f1 can be the same as f2, what are the constraints of C1, small c1 and capital C2, so we will have some constraints on that and based on these constraints, we will say, oh, this is synchronization free, okay? And for example, if I map everything to 0, that is also synchronization free because there is no parallelism, so I don't need to do any synchronization across different processes. So, but I need a more general way of specifying this, 0 is just a trivial solution, what is the space of all such solutions, and that's why I have if and only if. So, here is the full constraint, that was just the structure of the constraint, here I complete the sentence, for statement S1, here is the specification of S1, and S2, here is the specification of S2, the partitions C1, small c1, capital C2, small c2 must be such that whenever there is a data dependence between two iterations, then the mapping for those two iterations are same, right? So that's what synchronization free actually means, so in other words, I am just defining it here, that's why the if and only if, that whenever there is a data dependence between any two iterations of these statements, let's say statement I1 of statement S1, and iteration I1 of statement S1, and iteration I2 of statement S2, then if there was a data dependency between these two dynamic instances, or dynamic iterations, then they should have mapped to the same process. And I just need to specify this mathematically now, what are the constraints for when there is a data dependence, we have already seen this, we say for all I1 belonging to Z to the power D1, where D1 is the loopness depth of S1, and I2 belonging to Z to the power D2, so I know this is in D1 size tuple of integers, this is a D2 size tuple of integers, if D1 I1 plus D1 is greater than or equal to 0, and D2 I2 plus D2 is greater than or equal to 0, which basically means that I1 belongs to the valid loop iteration space of S1, and I2 belongs to the valid loop iteration space of S2, and I1 plus small f1 equals f2 I2 plus small f2, they are both accessing the same element, and one of them was a write, which is not written here, but that is what basically a data dependence would mean, so let me just write it, 1 is a write, then c1 I1 plus small c1 must be equal to c2 I2 plus small c2, so basically if there is a data dependence between any two iterations, I1 and I2, then it must be true that both I1 and I2 map to the same processor PID, in processor ID or PID, how do I record that, what is the processor ID that I1 maps to, that is c1 I1 plus c1, that is the function, and what is the processor ID that I2 maps to, that is c2 I2 plus c2, and so basically I have this mathematical formulation that whenever there is a data dependence, then they map to the same processor ID, so this is exactly our space partitioning constraints for synchronization free parallelism, and now the question is, what are the sum solutions to capital C1 and small c1, so notice that I1 and I2 are quantified and for all I1 and I2 it must be true, so the only unknowns in this whole equation, capital D1 and small d1 are known, these are just constants, similarly b2 and small b2, f1, small f1, f2, small f2, these are all constant matrices, small I1 and small I2 are quantified using the for all operator, so the only unknowns here are really capital C1 and small c1 and capital C2 and small c2, and we are interested in finding a solution to capital C1, small c1, capital C2, small c2, such that these constraints are satisfied, now once again I would point out that a trivial solution is just use 0 for capital C1 and small c1, and 0 for c2 and small c2, and these constraints would be trivially satisfied, because the then clause would be always true, because the left hand side and the right hand side would both evaluate to 0, it is a trivial solution, so it satisfies these constraints, which I also call the space partition constraints, but it is not a very useful solution, we are interested in a solution that maximizes the rank of capital C1 and maximizes the rank of capital C2, and yet satisfies these constraints, and yet satisfies the space partition constraints, so now we have learned about space partition constraints, to draw these constraints using a figure, to depict these space partition constraints using a figure, let's say this is the iteration space of S1, there are some points, let's say this is the iteration space of S2, these are some points, notice that I am using distinct iteration spaces, it is possible that they were the same iteration space, in fact it is also possible that S1 and S2 were the same, in either case, if S1 and S2 were the same, then I didn't really have to draw different iteration spaces, I would have just drawn the same iteration space, but more importantly, there are these red lines that are drawn between points of the iteration space, and they indicate data dependence, so for example this point and this point are data dependent, this point and this point across S1 and S2 are data dependent, and these two points within S2 are data dependent, so what do our space partition constraints say, they say that whenever the two points have a data dependence between them, then they must map to the same processor ID, and so to show that pictorially, let's say this is my processor space, so these are all my processors or K dimensional space of processor IDs, then the mapping should be such that for all things that have a data dependence, so in this case these two points have a data dependence, so they should be mapping to the same processor, on the other hand this point does not have a data dependence with these two points, and so this can potentially map to a different processor ID, so far I have just looked at S1, what about S2, so these mappings are being determined by capital C1 and small c1, because that's the fine function that is dictating what these mappings are going to be, similarly I can have constraint on S2, so just like before these two points have a data dependency, so they must map to the same processor ID using capital C1 and small c2, and across statements as well, so for example this point and this point have a data dependence, and so they must also map to the same point in the processor ID space, so we have three different types of constraints, one is for any two points within S1, for any two points within S2, and for a point in S1 and a point in S2, and basically I need to have these constraints for every possible pair of iteration points in the spaces of S1 and S2, so this is a pair wise comparison, and I need to basically choose my capital C, small c, capital C2, small c2 such for S1 and S2, such that all these constraints across all these different pairs of statements, and when I say pairs of statements, they can be such pairs as well, so between S1 and S1 as well, so between all such pairs, if there are n statements then there will be n square such pairs, so for all such pairs it should be true that the space partitioning constraint that I had in my previous slide are satisfied, pictorially speaking whenever there is a data dependency between two points in the iteration spaces of that pair of statements, then they must map to the same point in the processor space.
