Title: Compiler Design Module 178 : Verification Conditions
Video ID: YZ0MKwNGo3s
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

When we were discussing invariant inference or identifying what are invariants, we basically used this idea of induction. We said there's a base case where we have to show that the precondition followed by the program path from entry to the loop head ensures that the invariant at the loop is satisfied. And then we showed that if the invariant is satisfied at any kth iteration, then it is also satisfied after one more iteration of the loop, which means at the beginning of the k plus 1th iteration. And so all these kind of proof obligations, including the proof obligation for the base case, which is from the precondition to the loop head and for the inductive case, which is from the kth iteration to the k plus 1th iteration are basically called verification conditions or these are once again a verification condition is a proof obligation that is generated as a part of a larger proof. So let's take this familiar example of the Euclid integer division. We have the precondition, which is x greater than equal to zero, y greater than zero, x is going to serve as our dividend and y is going to serve as a divisor and q and r are going to maintain the quotient and the remainder respectively. And at this loop head, the invariant that we're interested in proving is that x equals q y plus r and in fact, at this point, r is greater than equal to y. And the post condition that we are interested in proving is that x equals q y plus r, q comma r are greater than equal to zero and r, which is the remainder is less than y, which is the divisor. And so we want to prove this and we are going to generate some verification conditions. In this module, I'm going to show what are those verification conditions and what is the encoding of those verification conditions as whole triples and then as logical statements. All right, so let's look at the first proof obligation, which is the proof obligation associated with the base case of our invariant checking algorithm. And so the base case recall is basically saying that if you start at the beginning of the program and you assume that at the beginning of the program, the precondition is true, then when you reach the loop head by traversing this path from the beginning of the program till the loop head, then the post condition is whatever is the invariant that you have identified. So I can write this verification condition as a whole triple. The precondition is x is greater than equal to zero, y is greater than zero, that's coming straight away from the precondition at the entry of the program. Also can be thought of as the invariant at the entry of the program. And then the program itself, in this case, when I say a program, it's not the full program, but a snippet of the program. The snippet of the program here that we are interested in is these three statements, q equals zero, it's an assignment, r equals x, another assignment and while r is greater than equal to y, which is a branch condition. So when I say while it's really like, because I'm just executing the while check only once, I'm going to basically check if r is greater than equal to y. So basically this is the program, q equals zero, r equals x, if r is greater than equal to y. And the post condition that we are interested in proving is whatever we had as our candidate invariant, which is x equals q y plus r and r is greater than equal to y. So this is the verification condition itself can be written, can be expressed as a whole triple. And that's a good thing. And that's one of the good, that's one of the powerful features of this abstraction of a whole triple, which involves three components, the precondition, the post condition, and a program or a snippet of the program and many proof obligations are so much easier to express and understand using these whole triple notations. All right, so once again, this is a whole triple notation that represents the proof obligation for the base case. Similarly, I have a proof obligation for the inductive case. And it's going to be similar, you know, assuming that this holds, this invariant holds at the beginning of the kth iteration. So I just write that as the precondition. Then after you execute one iteration of the loop, so one iteration, the loop is going to execute r equals r minus y, q equals q plus one, and if r is greater than equal to y's check because of the while loop, is going to succeed, then x equals q y plus r and r greater than equal to y still hold. I have deliberately used q prime and r prime here just to distinguish them from the original q and r because after this execution, the program, the values of q and r would have changed. You know, depending on how you want to represent it, you may prime the variables or you may not prime the variables. Irrespective, the precondition is supposed to represent an assertion on the state of the machine before the program was executed. And the post condition is supposed to represent the assertion on the state of the machine after the program has finished executing or exited. And in this case, again, this is a snippet of the program, which represents one iteration of the loop. And this forms our verification condition two. Finally, we have, you know, we are also interested in proving that this whole program has this post condition which says x equals q y plus r and r is less than y. And so this will, you know, to basically prove this, we are going to say that if I move from the loop head and kind of go back and do this check and the check fails, which means r is not greater than equal to y, then I go back, go to the exit of the loop. And I want to show that at the exit of the loop, the post condition holds. So the corresponding verification condition again can be expressed as a whole triple. The precondition is again the invariant, which is x equals q y plus r and r is greater than equal to y. The program is now again the one body of the loop, which is r gets r minus y, q gets q plus one. And we check whether if r is greater than equal to y, but this time the check fails, which means if not of r greater than equal to y, if all these statements are executed and I reach this point, then it must, the post condition should be that, you know, whatever is the post condition of the program, x equals q y plus r and r is less than y. And additionally, I could have also said q and r are greater than equal to zero. Notice again, I am basically using the primed version just to say that, you know, this q and this q can potentially be different. In fact, I mean, if I want to be more precise, I should have probably even said, you know, times in the program description itself. It doesn't really matter, it's a matter of notation. As long as the meaning is clear, the post condition is always on the state of the machine at the end of the program and the precondition is always on the state of the machine at the beginning of the program. And so if the states are different, for example, r versus r prime, then of course, you know, they're going to be talking about different values. Finally, these were the three verification conditions that we generated and using these three verification conditions, we can show that this whole program basically obeys this precondition and post condition. So we can have a whole triple that relates the precondition to its post condition for the whole program C, where C is the program that is, that contains the loop. All right. So if I'm able to show VC1, VC2 and VC3, which are the three verification conditions that are showed on the previous slides, then I can show, I mean, I've pretty much shown that if I start with the precondition and I execute the program, and if the program terminates, that's a partial correctness condition, then it must be true that the post condition holds, which in this case is x equals q i plus r and r is less than y. And maybe a couple more other things such as q and r are greater than or equal to zero. So this is what a typical proof methodology looks like. You have a program and you also have a precondition. You are interested in finding a relevant post condition and you basically identify loop invariance, generate the corresponding verification conditions, just like VC1, VC2 and VC3. Using these verification conditions, you can show that the larger higher level theorem for the entire program holds, which can also be expressed as a board triple. Once again, I want to emphasize that this higher level theorem is actually a partial correctness condition. It actually is saying that only if C terminates, then post condition holds. In this example, I can also, for example, show that C will always terminate, but that is not what is being imported by this particular theorem that I have stated as a board triple. All right, so now that we have seen how we can kind of break a bigger proof effort into smaller proof efforts, especially when the proof effort involves loops in the program, just like the while loop that I showed in the Euclidean integer division example. Then you can kind of break them down into smaller snippets of programs, which are all acyclic and then kind of do smaller verification conditions, use induction and based on that, generate some verification conditions and if you are able to show all those verification conditions are true, then you have been able to show that the larger bigger proof obligation or the theorem is true, which is for the whole program that may involve loops. But when we look at each snippet of the program, we kind of break it down such that each snippet of the program is acyclic. If it had cycles, then we need to break it down even further, for example, by having an invariant at the head of a loop. But even when a program snippet is acyclic, or it's a straight line piece of code, how do you identify whether a certain proof obligation is correct or not? So here is an example and I'm going to start with the assignment statement. Recall that in our integer division program, one of the kind of common statements was the assignment statement. For example, we assign Q to zero or R to X. So that's the assignment statement and let's say the snippet of the program that I'm considering is only a single statement, which is the assignment statement and we're going to start look at each separate kind of small statement individually and from there we can kind of generalize to larger snippets of programs, larger acyclic snippets of programs. So let's look at this snippet of the program, which is a single assignment statement, which says X colon equals some expression E on X, Y, and dot dot dot. Here X, I mean, the reason I have X here is just to say that it's possible that whatever I'm assigning is also on the RHS of the expression. And this is common for imperative languages like C, et cetera, and even the toy language that we use to implement the integer division program that we had on the previous slide. Further, Y here represents some other variable in the program, which is, which may or may not be related to X, and then dot dot dot. So whatever are the other variables, and this is just some arbitrary assignment statement present in the program. And let's say I have a proof obligation, which has a precondition, which uses X, Y, et cetera, in its formula, in its logical statement. Let's call that precondition P. So P of X, Y, dot dot dot, which means P is a function of the values of X, Y, et cetera, at the beginning of this assignment statement. And at the end of the assignment statement, the post condition I'm interested in proving is, let's say Q. And once again, Q could be a function of X, Y, dot dot dot. Now this is a whole triple, but the question is, how do I discharge this proof obligation? How can I kind of bring this proof obligation into a form where I don't have to worry about the programming language, its semantics, and things like that. One of the problems with this representation is that there is the C component, the program component, for which I need to understand what the program really means. And I want to bring it to a form which is more like a functional expression representation, where I can kind of apply my logical theories, like propositional logic, or first-order logic, or higher-order logic, such that I can kind of reason about them in those logics. And so in this case, the other way to state the problem that I'm interested in addressing is what should be the encoding. So this is a whole triple that is given to me. What should be the logical encoding of this whole triple, such that this whole triple evaluates to true, if and only if that logical encoding evaluates to true. And one of the logical encodings was given by Robert Floyd, and the logical encoding for this statement, this whole triple is, for all x, y dot dot dot, if there exists x prime, such that the precondition p holds for x prime y dot dot dot, and x equals e of x prime y dot dot dot, then the postcondition holds. So I'm saying that these two statements are kind of equivalent. This is a whole triple representation, and this is a logical representation in first-order logic, where I'm using the for all and there exists operators. Now, if you read this carefully, basically what I'm saying is that x prime represents the state, x prime y represents the state of the machine before this assignment has been executed. Notice that y hasn't changed, so I don't have a y prime here. So only x prime has changed across the assignment statement. So x prime y dot dot dot represents the state of the machine before the assignment statement. If there exists a state of the machine, such that the precondition holds and when I evaluate the expression e on that state, on the input state, so the argument of e is x prime, then I get capital X. So capital X is basically supposed to be the state of the machine after the execution. Then it must be true that q evaluates to true for x, y, and actually this should be x, y, and then dot dot dot to be more precise. So this is one kind of encoding for this whole triple using first-order logic, and this was contributed by Floyd. It uses the for all operator, the universal quantifier and the existential quantifier. And then there's an implication. The existential quantifier is on the beginning state at the input or the start of the program, and the universal quantifier is on the state or the exit of the program. And here the program that I'm interested in is a single assignment instruction. There's a simpler encoding for this same statement, which is the whole triple, which uses substitution as an operator, and this was contributed by Moore, which is for all x, y, if the precondition holds for x, y, dot dot dot, then the post-condition holds for x, y, dot dot dot, except that you substitute, you know, the post-condition holds for the substitution of x with y, x with e into q. So first of all, let's understand this substitution operator. The substitution operator is written as some formula, square brackets, and then the variable and the corresponding expression to which it substitutes. For example, if the formula is b, then b square brackets x colon equals a is the substitution of a for x. So wherever x appears in b, we replace it with a in b. And so q, x, y, dot dot dot, square brackets x colon equals y, e is read as q with e substituted for x. So for example, if q was x plus 1 equals 0, then this would become e plus 1 equals 0. This whole expression would become e plus 1 equals 0. And so let's try to read this logical statement. It says for all x, y, dot dot dot, if the precondition holds on x, y, dot dot dot, so here x, y, and the other dot dot dot represents the state of the machine at the beginning of the program, and that's where we want the precondition to hold, then q holds on the new machine state. And the new machine state can be obtained by using the original machine state, which is x, y, dot dot dot, but also replacing x with e, and that's exactly what the assignment operator is supposed to do, and that's what our substitution operation is giving us in our logical statement. So assuming you can have the substitution operator built in into your logical statements, then you can avoid that complexity of having the existential quantifier and other things, and it becomes an easier thing to read. We're saying that if the precondition holds on the input state, then the postcondition holds on the output state. And how do I say that the postcondition holds on the output state? I basically just replace x with e, and then kind of assert q on the resulting state. And that's what the RHS of this implication operator says. Let's look at an example for understanding this assignment verification condition in more detail. So let's say the whole triple that I'm interested in proving is, if x is greater than or equal to zero at the start of the program, and if I execute x colon equals x plus one, then x must be greater than zero at the end of the program. Once again, I'm assuming that here x is a mathematical integer. It can go up till infinity in this particular programming language that I'm using. So if I want to encode this, first of all, it's easy to see that this is true, because if x is greater than or equal to zero, and then I increment it by one, then it will be strictly greater than zero. Now, if I encode this using Floyd's formula, I'm basically saying for all x, there exists x prime. So for all x, there exists x prime. x is supposed to be the state at the end of the program. x prime is the state at the beginning of the program. If there exists x prime such that x prime is greater than or equal to zero, that's a precondition, and x equals x prime plus one. That's basically coming from the assignment relation. So the assignment operator is causing a relation to be formed between the end state and the beginning state. The end state is capital X, the beginning state was x prime, and so the corresponding relation is this equality relation x equals x prime plus one. Then x must be greater than zero, which means at the end, the end state should be greater than zero. So if this whole thing is true, if there exists such an x prime, then x must be greater than zero, and this should be true for all possible x. So this is the Floyd encoding for this particular Hoare triple. Let's look at the Hoare encoding for this particular triple. Once again, I say for all x, this time I'm going to use x to represent the state at the beginning of the program. If x is greater than or equal to zero, so that's a precondition, then I want to say x is greater than zero substituted with x plus one for x. And so that becomes x is greater than zero substituted with x colon equals x plus one, and that just becomes x plus one greater than zero. And so the second one is both of these are all these three representations are actually equivalent. And you can kind of see that these are all evaluating to true or these are all tautologies. For example, if x is greater than equal to zero, then obviously x plus one is greater than zero. That's the Hoare triple. If there exists x prime such that x prime is greater than equal to zero and x is greater equal to x prime plus one, then x must be greater than zero and that should hold for all possible x. So all these statements are basically tautologies. And in other words, this Hoare triple is also a tautology.
