Title: Compiler Design Module 94 : Worklist Algorithm
Video ID: 5slyZmmtqkk
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

So, let's look at the DFA fixed point iteration once again. So the input to the fixed point iteration algorithm is a control flow graph, CFG equals n, e, entry, exit, n is the set of nodes, e is the set of edges, entry is a special node and exit is also a special node in the control flow graph. And then if I look at the forward DFA and you know I could also have looked at the backward DFA but just for simplicity let's just look at one of them and I arbitrarily pick forward. If I look at the forward DFA, I initialize out of entry to the boundary condition value. So whatever is the boundary condition value for a particular DFA that you are interested in. And then also for each other basic block other than entry, I just say out B equals top value where top value is again specific to the particular DFA that we are looking at. The top value is based on the meet operator. So when we define the meet operator, it automatically also defines our top value. Top value is something which is greater than equal to everything else and that is also greater than equal to operator. The ordering operator is also implied by the meet operator. And we're going as I've been saying, we'll also be looking at it in more detail later. And then this part here is actually the fixed point iteration. So this part is the initialization and the part below it is the iteration, the fixed point iteration. And so inside the iteration, we say while changes to any out occur for each basic block B, do this computation. So now here's the interesting observation because initially everything else is top. It's only the first node, the entry node that has a value that is other than top, that is the boundary condition value. So let's say if I pick some basic block which is other than entry, then you know the in of that basic block will be top, the out of the basic block will be top because in will be top because all its predecessors out would be top and so on. So only place where it would make sense to pick a basic block at the first step is the basic block that just follows the entry node. So all the nodes that are successors of the entry node are the ones that we really need to pick. Everything else we don't need to pick because if we pick them, then they are not going to change their values because their predecessors are top and so their current value is top and so even the next value is going to be top because meet over top is just top and then transfer function over top is also top. Typically, all right. And so transfer function over top is not necessarily top but typically it is top. But the point is that typically top represents that something has not been reached or it's the most aggressive value. So I want that things should basically reach that point and only then I should be computing it. All right. Okay. So the question here is do I really need to consider all basic blocks at every iteration or can I omit some basic block at some iteration? So that's question number one. Do I really need to consider all basic blocks or can I only consider some basic blocks? For example, I gave the example of a forward DFA. Then the first iteration, I only need to pick up the successors of the entry node. And then from there on, the data will start flowing, right? If I pick something later, something in the middle or something at the end and the first iteration that is usually not going to be very useful. And the other thing is if I have multiple basic blocks from which I could pick, should there be an order in which I should pick them? Is it going to matter? And, you know, I'm going to prove, we're going to see later on that the order doesn't really matter from a correctness or from a point of view of what result we get. But the order may matter from an efficiency perspective, how fast my DFA algorithm is. Okay. So there's this famous algorithm called the work list algorithm. It's also commonly called the Kildal's work list algorithm named after the person who first devised this algorithm. Kildal and for a forward, so the idea here is the following for a forward DFA, the inB value does not change if none of the outP values change where P is a predecessor of B. So if the in value will change only if one of the out values of the predecessor has changed because if none of the out values of the predecessor has changed, then, you know, I am already in a fixed point because the out values have changed. So the meet operator applied on the out values of the thing is not going to give me a new in value. So when I say already in the fixed point, we're already in the fixed point at that, in that segment of the program. Although, you know, maybe other places we are not at the fixed point. And so for a forward DFA, the inB value does not change if none of the outP values change where P is a predecessor of B, right? So inB and outP. And so similarly for backward DFA and this statement is for a forward DFA, but I could have stated the statement for a backward DFA. Similarly, I would have just said for a backward DFA, the outB value does not change if none of the inS values change where S is a successor of P, right? So forward and backward are kind of isomorphic. I'm just using forward as an example, but you can always kind of, you know, flip it and kind of start talking about backward as well. All right. So here is the based on this observation. Here is the idea that we will maintain a work list, which is a list of basic logs that still need to be processed, right? So list of basic logs that we know that they need to be processed because maybe in the forward DFA, their predecessor was just changed and so, you know, it's possible that their successors are going to be needing some change as well. So let's not read the, so I'm going to read this sentence in blue, but I'm going to omit these kind of annotations in red, which are meant for backward DFA. I'm going to read the backward later. So in a forward DFA, whenever we remove a basic block from the work list, we compute its outState, right? So whenever we remove a basic block from the work list, we compute its outState because that's what the body of that loop says. And if this state has changed, so this is important, right? Only if it has changed, the block's successors are added to the work list, right? And this basically captures our observation that a block B needs to be added to the work list only if one of its predecessors out values has changed. And so that's basically how we're going to implement our DFA and this is going to be hopefully more efficient than looking at all basic blocks in each iteration. And that's the whole idea. The work list algorithm is supposed to make the DFA fixed point iteration more efficient. Now I can read the same sentence for a backward DFA as well, which is just replace the forward with backward and out with in and successors with predecessors. So in a backward DFA, whenever we remove a basic block from the work list, we compute it in state. If the state has changed, the block's predecessors are added to the work list. So this would be for a backward DFA. All right. So how does the work list algorithm proceed? So at initialization time, we add the basic blocks whose information is known. So whatever basic blocks information is known at initialization time at the start of the DFA algorithm, they are added to the work list. So what are the basic blocks whose initial information is known? It's exactly the set of basic blocks for which we have boundary condition values, right? So basically that's coming from the boundary condition. For example, typically for a forward DFA, the boundary condition is known for the entry node. For a backward DFA, typically the boundary condition is known for the exit node. And so initialization would just involve adding either the entry node to the work list for a forward DFA or the exit node into the work list for a backward DFA for the typical DFA where this property holds. And then the termination condition is that the work list becomes empty. So notice that things are added to the work list only if something changed. So for example, if a block's out value changed, only then the successor basic blocks are added to the work list. So at a point where the work list becomes empty, it basically indicates that we have reached the fixed point. So there's a nice way of detecting the fixed point also. So the outer condition check that while any out has changed, it just now reduces to the work list has become empty. Alright, also I want to point out that the work list is a set, right? So the work list is a set because each block may appear at most once in the work list at any given time. So we add to the work list, but then it's possible that a block could have two predecessors and both those predecessors changed. And so because of that, we try to add the same block twice into the work list. But if we add the same block twice, it's not like we're going to process it twice, right? So we just kind of maintain it as a set. So at each basic block is going to appear at most once in the set. So that algorithm basically gives you a sense of how we are going to proceed in in kind of choosing the basic blocks that we should process. So for example, when I'm looking at my original algorithm, what I'm going to do is that iteration loop that I have and there I'm going to initialize by just adding the entry node to the work list and then I'm going to say, okay, now let's add all the success because the entry node has changed because of the boundary value. I'm going to say, okay, now let's add all the successor nodes of the entry node. And if any of the successor nodes have changed, then we add the successor of the successor and so on until you know, until things keep changing and hopefully some at some point things will stop changing and that's coming from the fact that there is a you know, there's some properties about the ordering operator, which is basically giving us this this property that at some point things will keep stop changing and we're going to look at that in more detail later on as well. So that's, you know, that's a good way of pruning out basic blocks that we don't need to look at, right? So we only look at those basic blocks whose predecessors have changed for a forward DFA and and so, you know, that's basically answers our first question, which is can we omit some basic blocks and if so, how do we identify which ones to omit? The answer is well, if you know, if the neighboring basic block has changed only then the the current basic block is added to the work list and by neighboring, I mean predecessor in case of forward and successor in case of backward. Now, the other question is if there are multiple basic blocks present in the work list at any point given time and there will be then what should I pick? Which one should I pick? Is it okay if I pick anyone? So the answer to this question is yes, indeed it is okay to pick anyone. That's just the property of this work of this dataflow analysis iteration fixed point iteration algorithm and that's completely independent of the work list algorithm, all right? So you can pick any basic block at any time and yet you are going to arrive at the same solution and that's going to be the most precise solution for some definition of precision and I've been saying this we're going to discuss why and how later about precision and the fact that you know, it doesn't matter what order we pick but from an efficiency point of view, does it matter which one I pick? Well, it turns out that yes, indeed it matters which one to pick and here is an example. So let's say I have a basic block B1, basic block B2, basic block B3 and then I have basic block, there's an edge from B2 to B3. So let's say initially in my work list, B1 is present and B1 changes. So then I'm going to add both B2 and B3 to my work list, right? So this is, this was one and now B2 and B3 can be, have been added to the big work list. Now I have two options either I could have picked B3 first and then B2 or I could have picked B2 first and then B3. Now, which one do you think is better? Well, it's, you know, intuitively it feels like, you know, it's better to do B2 first because once you have done B2, then the information across this edge will become up-to-date, right? From B2 to B3, right? So let me just use a different color. The information on this edge from B2 to B3 will become up-to-date if we do B2 first. On the other hand, if we do B3 first, then what will happen is that the information on this edge would be old, would be stale and so we would, maybe B3 would change or maybe B3 will not change, whatever happens. But then we will now do B2 and now because of B2, now maybe B3 has to be added again to the work list because B2 is pointing to B3, right? So in this case, it would have been better to pick B2 before B3, all right? In general, if B2 has an edge, if some block B1, B i has an edge to some other block B j, then it seems better to basically pick B i before B j. Now, if the code has no cycle, then we can actually order these basic blocks so that nodes that are reachable are kind of considered later. So if B i can reach B j, then B j will be considered later and B i would be considered before B j. But if there is a cycle in the control flow graph, then both B i and B j can reach each other, in which case we can pick either of them and it should not really. We really don't have any good way or heuristic to basically say that, okay, we should pick this or that. So that's basically the idea that we're going to use to order the selection of basic blocks when there are multiple choices in the work list. Okay, so the first point is that the choice doesn't matter from a correctness point of view, but so it is okay to pick any basic block from a correctness point of view, but the choice may influence the efficiency of the algorithm. So processing order for basic blocks. So basic idea is it would be fastest if all predecessors for a forward DFA and you know, if I was backward DFA, then I would just say all successors instead of all predecessors. So would be fastest if all predecessors of B are processed before B is processed. So in an example, before B3 is processed, it's better that you have both B1 and B2 have been processed before B3 is processed. So would be fastest of all predecessors of B are processed before B is processed so that basically when B is being processed, we should be able to use the latest information on all the incoming edges and this is for a forward DFA. All right, so that's great. And in fact, in the absence of loops, it is possible to order the blocks so that the algorithm converges processed by processing each basic block at most once. All right, so for example, we are looking at this example of B1, B2, B3. So if you pick it in this order, first B1, then B2 and last B3, then we just need to process each basic block at most once because B3 is the last basic block. Let's say it's just the exit node or something. Then, you know, we are just done with processing each basic block at most once. Whereas if you had picked the other order which is B1, B3 and then B2, then we would have had to process B3 twice because first we would process B3 because of B1 and then we would process B3 again because of B2. And so but you know, so but when in that basic, in that graph there was no cycle and so this statement saying that in the absence of loops, so if it's an IA cyclic graph, it is possible to order the block so that the algorithm converges by processing each basic block at most once. And example, you can just use any topological sort for the, of the graph. So a topological sort of a graph is basically a sort of the graph where a sorting of the nodes in the graph such that if a node x can reach a node y, then x appears before y. Now because there are no cycles in the graph, it is possible to have a topological sort and if you process the nodes in the topological sorted order, topologically sorted order of the graph, then you are going to get a good answer, good efficiency of the algorithm. You can just kind of in one iteration, you are not in one iteration, but every basic block would need to be processed at most once in the entire execution of the DFA fixed-point iteration. However, that is not true if there are cycles because in cycles you could, let's say in the previous example, if there was B2 and B3 and then B3 was actually again pointing to B2 and let's say there was B1 which was pointing to both B2 and B3. Now it's not clear which one to pick and if I pick B2 first, even then it's possible that I have to do B2 again because let's say I pick B1, B2, then I pick B3 and B3 changes and because of B3's change, B2 needs to be processed again and maybe because of B2's change, B3 needs to be processed again and so this can keep going on for some time until maybe we hit bottom or we hit some fixed-point or something like that in which case we have to process each basic block potentially more than once and so this statement is only true in the absence of loops, not in the presence of loops. Okay, but what about in presence of loops? In general, the reverse post-order is a good idea for forward DFA and post-order is a good idea for backward DFA. So there are no theoretical guarantees that it's going to give you the best answer but in general it helps because so in the presence of cycles if you can just figure out what is the reverse post-order, reverse post-order basically captures the fact that if a node X can reach node Y, then in the reverse post-order X would appear before Y in the absence of cycles and stuff like that and so even if there are cycles, some reverse post-order will give you some arbitrary ordering because there could be multiple reverse post-orders and so it will give you some arbitrary ordering and that would typically work well for a forward DFA because for things that are not involved in the cycle, it would give you a topological sort and isomorphically for the backward DFA. So just like reverse post-order is ordering things that are reachable later, post-order is ordering things that are reachable earlier because that's what we want in a backward DFA. So reverse post-order and post-order are just flips of each other, inverses of each other and so while one works better for forward, the other works better for backward DFA.
