Title: Compiler Design Module 68 : Intermediate Representation
Video ID: Mcq5gNNDXTw
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

Now we're going to start discussing code optimization. And if we just look at the compiler pipeline, we have a source program, which is the unoptimized specification of the program logic by the human programmer. And then there's an assembly program, which is supposed to be the optimized machine readable code, which means machine executable code, low-level code, that needs to get executed. And we need to, somewhere in the middle, do optimization, all right? And the question is, where should we do our optimizations? Well, one option is that we could optimize at the source program level itself. For example, we could run our optimizations on the abstract syntax tree of the programming language. There's one problem, however. If we do that, we have to deal with a lot of unnecessary features that were specific to the programming language, and they were sometimes redundant. For example, a C language has both a for loop and a while loop. Now, from an optimization standpoint, it doesn't really matter whether it's a for loop or a while loop. What matters is that it is a loop, right? The fact, the C language designers perhaps decided to use both for and while for programmer convenience, because some programming patterns are better suited for for, and some other programming patterns are better suited for while, right? And so, that has nothing to do with optimization. And if we try to optimize at the source code level, then we have to deal with all these things that were not really necessary to deal with. So, one idea is that, okay, why do we need to deal with the entire source language features set, rather than, let's just, rather just, you know, translate the source language into some common base where we can do the optimization, and that base has smaller number of features, okay? Now, one option here is to look at the assembly language itself, right? Because assembly language has much fewer features, so to say, than the source language, because assembly language designers do not really have to care about programmability. You know, no human is, very few humans are actually going to go and program it, so assembly language is not designed for programmability. But assembly language is mainly designed for better performance, you know, there are kind of complex instructions, like vector instructions and things like that. And so, maybe that's the right place to do our optimizations. However, there's a problem there as well, because by the time we reach the assembly language, most of the decisions have been already taken for us, right? And so that means that if I start doing optimization at the assembly level, then, you know, the optimization space is small. For example, register allocation. So maybe the machine has eight registers, and so by the time I've already converted it to the assembly language representation, I don't have much flexibility in what registers I may use now. It's very similar to what we were discussing when we were discussing program language, semantics, and we said that, you know, we want to keep things as abstract so that implementations have the maximum amount of flexibility. So same thing applies to optimization as well. You want to do optimization as, at an abstract level, so that the space of optimization becomes larger, because the flexibility becomes larger for optimization. However, we don't, we neither do what, we want to go all the way to the source program, nor do we want to go all the way to the assembly program. Also, it's not just about the fact that source programs have a lot of features like for and while, the example that I took, but also, you know, we want the optimizer sometimes to be aware of what is the underlying architecture. Right, for example, what kind of vector instructions are available. Depending on that, the optimizer may do architecture specific optimizations. And so if we do optimization at the source level, then we don't have that visibility into the architecture and what the instruction set is. And so these are all kind of difficult questions that one has to deal with when you're doing code optimization. And one of the answers that has emerged is the idea of using an intermediate representation. All right, and so we basically, you know, most compilers will have some kind of an intermediate representation. The source program would first be translated, the abstract syntax tree would first be translated to the intermediate representation. Optimizations would be done on the intermediate representation to generate improved versions of the intermediate representation. And then finally, the intermediate representation, the optimized intermediate representation would be translated to the assembly program. So an intermediate representation is also commonly called an IR. So I'm going to use IR for referring to the intermediate representation from now on. Now, the question is how to design the intermediate representation. Now, we want to make minimum commitments when we design the intermediate representation in the sense that we want to keep the optimization space as open as possible, right? One option is that intermediate representation starts assembling assembly as much as possible, but that just kind of reduces the optimization space as we just discussed. Also, the intermediate representation should be kind of simple enough so that it removes the unnecessary program features. For example, we don't need to deal with for and while and things like that. We just say, wait, there's some kind of loop or some kind of control flow and things like that. And so one needs to design an intermediate representation, okay. But there's always a constant tension and this is the same tension that we started with, which is how close the intermediate representation should be to the assembly program representation and how close should it be to the source program representation. So it's being pulled on both sides, so to say. And if it's too close to assembly, there's smaller optimization space. If it's too close to source, then we lose out on architecture-specific optimization. So now it's not, I mean, maybe we are able to find an intermediate representation which removes all the unnecessary features like for and while, but then if we keep it too close to the source program representation, then we don't have any kind of understanding of what is the, during our optimization, we will not have the understanding of what are the instructions that are available in the architecture and things like that. Okay, we're going to, you know, I'm kind of, the discussion is sort of abstract and we're going to concretize that in the next few lecture modules in a bit more detail. But here's another big advantage of an intermediate representation. You can have multiple source languages like C, C++, Java, Python, JavaScript, Golang, and so on. And you can have a common intermediate representation for each of them. And similarly, you could have multiple architectures like x86, ARM, PowerPC, Arduino, Uno, or, you know, what have, there's so many architectures, right? Even like tiny devices for IoT, which are really, really small cores and things like that. So you could have, you know, instruction set architectures, and you could have n number of instructions and architectures. And if you can design an intermediate representation that is kind of in the middle and that is able to serve both many languages and many architectures, then that's a great win because then we only need to write our optimizers once for the intermediate representation. We don't have to rewrite them over and over again for different languages and for different ISAs. And so, but the problem is, you know, this theoretically sounds very good, but the tension now has become worse because now what should be the features that should be represented in the intermediate representation becomes larger, right? So the intermediate representation starts becoming more and more complex. For example, the kind of constructs that need to be supported in the IR to optimize a Python program are going to be different for the type of construct that need to be supported in the IR to optimize the C program, because C is a lower level language. So we do, for example, we don't really care about objects and, you know, a higher level representation of a string and things like that. Whereas for a higher level language like Python, you would need to worry about those things. So IR design is more an art than a science and you can only learn from experience. It's not like, you know, here is a bunch of mathematical formula and voila, I have my best IR possible. That's not how it works. It's more like, you know, IR has been evolving ever since the introduction of compilers from 1960s. Even today, IRs are undergoing constant innovation and, you know, lots and lots of people, if I was to make an estimate, maybe tens of thousands or hundreds of thousands of people are working on either designing the IR or writing optimization algorithms for the current IR. In reality, you know, what really ends up happening is that, you know, it's very difficult to design one single IR that caters to all possible things from optimization standpoint. So often what happens is there are multiple IRs. So, you know, IR1, IR2, IRN, where maybe, for example, you know, N could be between, you know, three to five or something like that, depending on what is the language and what's the ISA that we are interested in. So maybe five different IRs or three different IRs are present and each IR has its own level of abstraction. So for example, maybe the first level of IR has higher level abstractions, IR1 has higher level abstractions, IR2 has still lower level of abstraction and so on. And so each level has its own types of optimization. I'm gonna see an example to understand that in more detail because different levels of abstractions require different types of optimizations and they are only possible at those levels of abstraction because if we kind of go lower, then we lose out some information. And if we keep higher, then we don't have enough information of the lower levels to be able to do those optimizations. So this is actually a very complex kind of engineering problem, actually. So different types of optimizations require different abstraction levels. 


So let's look at an example. And the example I'm picking is one of the recent languages called TensorFlow, which is being used for writing machine learning programs in particular to write neural networks. And in this language, the source program is represented as a graph, okay? So it's just a directed acyclic graph, for example, maybe it can also have cycles. And nodes are operators. So maybe the node is you want to do some kind of arithmetic multiplication or convolution, or you want to find the minimum of all the inputs or things like that. And edges basically represent data flows. You may say that, okay, after you are done doing the convolution, the output should go to the next operator and that edge is representing what the next operator is going to be that needs to get executed after that. In this particular language, what is the data that is flowing along these edges? So in TensorFlow, the data that flows along these edges are tensors. What are tensors? Tensors are just multi-dimensional arrays, which represent, for example, data features for your machine learning algorithm or things like that. So what are some example optimizations in this framework? Well, you can imagine that there could be some matrix level rewrites. For example, you may want to have a rewrite saying that, oh, by the way, if you ever see a multiplication of A with A inverse, then you should just replace it with the identity matrix. Now this is, to be able to implement this optimization, you need to know that something represents a matrix, something represents a matrix inverse, and then this is the matrix multiplication operator. Now these are very high level things, and by the time we reach the assembly, all these high level kind of abstractions or high level information is lost by the time we come all the way to assembly. And so to do these kind of optimizations at the assembly level or IRs that are close to the assembly level would be extremely difficult. However, if we keep these information around, in the source program, that information is very much around because in TensorFlow, everything is matrices, higher dimensional arrays, tensors or matrices, and so you know that, okay, this is a matrix and maybe something is coming from a inverse operator, and so this is another matrix, and you can see that, oh, this is, you know, they're getting multiplied so that you can just replace that with the identity. This information is only available at a very high level language. The moment you kind of start generating code for it, let's say using the Cgen function or something like that, you'll have to say, oh, how is a matrix represented? You'll say, oh, matrix is represented in row major form. Then how is the multiplication operator implemented? You'll say, oh, I'll write a triple nested loop to do matrix multiplication. And once you've done all this, then the code is starting to look like so messy that it becomes impossible to figure out that actually it's an A into A inverse, right? So that's not, you know, that's not the place where you can do these optimizations. So these optimizations need to be done before you actually lower all these matrices, you make these, before you make all these code generation choices, for example, layout of the matrix or implementation of the multiplication operator and the inverse operator and things like that. Similarly, there could be parallelization optimization. So maybe you can see that in the graph, these things can happen in parallel. Those things cannot happen in parallel and things like that. So what, where are their dependencies and where they're not dependencies. Once again, you know, for this high level language, these dependencies are going to be in the form of matrices. And so it may be better to do parallelization at the higher level than lower level. You could do locality optimization. So for example, there are fixed size caches in your architecture. And you know, you want to know what is the size of, now, how should you organize your data so that your caches look maximum utilized. So you want to organize your data such that accesses that are closed in time are also kind of likely to be in the cache together, maybe closed in space. For example, should I represent my matrix in a column major format or a row major format? Now, if the matrix is being accessed mostly in row major pattern, then maybe it makes more sense to store it in row major format because that's going to give us better locality and things like that. But actually, there's a whole discussion on how to do better locality for these kinds of things, which is discussed in the compiler optimization course, which we're going to do later. And then vectorization. So maybe some of the operations, you can do vectorize. So let's say you're doing the same operation over and over again over different elements of the array. And so you can vectorize that by doing a set of operations in one go on a set of values which are stored contiguously in such an array. And then there are traditional optimizations like register allocation, instruction selection, code generation, and things like that. For example, we've already seen a flavor of an optimization which was to reduce the number of temporaries. And so all those come under the low level optimization and these optimizations cannot be done at the higher level of abstraction. And so for that, you would need to look at the lower level IR, like IRN or something like that, so maybe IR3 or IR5, something that's close to the semilanguage. So yes, to summarize these, a few of these optimizations, the example optimization that we discussed, they require higher level IR. There are some others basically work on a lower level IR.
