Title: Compiler Design Module 124 3: Translation to SSA
Video ID: VKWUKC_ib2c
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

Now I'm going to discuss the static single assignment form or SSA form in more detail and over the next few modules, I'm going to discuss an algorithm to convert a program, any program and three address code to SSA. First of all, what is SSA? A single program is in SSA form if each variable is the target of exactly one assignment statement in the program text. Now, so every variable, so for example, if there were two assignments to a variable X, then we rename those two assignments to X1 and X2, so that there is exactly one assignment to each variable X1 or X2. And notice that I'm saying exactly one, not at most one, because even if there are some values that are flowing into the program from entry, for example, there are some arguments, let's say ABC arguments, then I assume that those arguments are also assigned to some initial values. So I'm considering those arguments also as assignments. And so if I consider those arguments as assignments, then each variable is the target of exactly one assignment statement or it's assigned exactly once in the program text. So that's what I'm saying. It's not necessarily a program execution time. I'm saying in the static program text and that's why it's called static single assignment form. So now when we convert a program to static single assignment form, the question is which values should I ensure that or which variables should I ensure that they have exactly one statement, one assignment statement. Now, option number one is I convert all scalar variables, which means all integers like i32, i8, i1, in general, I'm just going to call it iN or vectors, for example, 4 i32s or 8 i32s. So for example, LLVM has vector types. So you can say iN cross 4 or iN cross 8 or floating point numbers fN, f32, f64, f80 and so on. And so all these values, which are kind of just small vectors are called scalars. And one option is that I version all the scalar variables such that all variables which are of scalar types, which is one of these types, have exactly one assignment in the program. The other option is to also version arrays. So for example, if there's an array A in my program, then I have different versions of array each time I change any element of the array version of the array. So for example, let's say I change AI, then I create a new array A2 or other memory locations like X, star X. So if I change star X, then I say, oh, I've changed, you know, I've changed entire memory because of this change in one location of the memory location. And the third option is to also include the IO devices such as console, printer, et cetera, to say that if you've printed something to the printer, to an IO device, then it's a new printer, the printer has a new state and each time it gets written to, it creates a new state. Now, in general, I mean, you know, you could pretty much do SSA on everything, but and depending on the application, it may or may not make sense to do SSA on everything. But typically compilers, including LLVM and GCC, would version scalers, but not version other things like arrays and IO devices, et cetera. So they will version all variables of the scalar types, for example, integer, float, vectors, et cetera. And in general, the trade-off is that the more things you version, the better precision you get in flow insensitive analysis. So recall that the whole motivation of converting the program to SSA form is so that I can use a flow insensitive data analysis to get better speed and get the same amount of precision. So the more things that I convert to SSA, for example, if I convert arrays to SSA, then I increase the precision somewhat because I keep track of different versions of the arrays and how the program behaves for different versions of the arrays, et cetera. But at the same time, you increase complexity, which is both space complexity because you have multiple versions of arrays, for example, or time complexity because the value size becomes bigger and recall that the time complexity is proportional to the value size and even programmability of the compiler algorithm. And so it becomes harder in that sense. And in general, the advantages that you get by versioning things like arrays or IO devices are much smaller than the amount of complexity increase that they cause. And so for that reason, it's a practical decision to only version variables of scalar types. Now, when we, so now let's come to the algorithm for translation to SSA and we want to replace, so what is the problem statement? We want to replace the original program with a new program, which has the same control flow graph. The control flow graph is identical, but for non-empty paths x to, so let's say there were two assignments to a variable v, to some variable v, one assignment is at statement x and another assignment is at statement y and there are non-empty paths x to some statement z and y to some statement z, where z is the convergence point, then we add a trivial phi node to z. So in this case, there's a, you know, there's a path from x to z and there's a path from y to z and z is the first such convergence point. Then I add a trivial phi node to z. What is the trivial phi node to z? It basically looks like v colon equals phi v v v v, which is basically a no-op, it basically, you know, assumes that v is flowing in all these different incoming edges at z and I just say that v colon equals phi v v v v, which basically means, I mean, it really doesn't, it's basically as good as a no-op. So that's why it's called a trivial phi node. So my first step in the algorithm is going to be identifying the locations where I need to put the trivial phi node and I'll put them at all these convergence points, the convergence point is defined as such that there's a non-empty path from x to z and y to z where x and y have assignments to variable v. We're going to formalize this later. I'm just sketching the algorithm in an informal manner for now. Then we replace each mention of v by new vl of some version. So for example, this is vl1 and this is vl2 and all these on the RHS, I have vl1, vl2, vl3, vli, vlj, vlk, etc. And also I should have vl, let's say n here. So every mention of the variable is renamed such that the program comes in SSA form. But this renaming cannot be arbitrary. We need to maintain a property. And the property is that at all uses of v in the original and corresponding vl in the new program, you should be able to prove that the red values must be identical. So if I change some version, some variable v, some mention of variable v to a new version, say vl, then if there's a use of v in the original program, then the corresponding use of vl should always see the same value that it would have seen in the original program. That basically means that I should rename it to the right version such that it's reflecting the most recent right to that particular variable v. So I'm not saying much. We already understand this intuitively, but I'm just putting that more formally upfront that at all uses of v in the original program and corresponding uses of vl in the new program, I should be able to prove that the red values are always identical in both programs. And that basically means ensuring that at all uses, I'm using the last written value at that particular PC. Now, when I convert a program to SSA, I need to ensure basically that I keep my program as small as possible. And for that, I define this notion of minimal SSA. So, for example, I could just insert trivial five nodes everywhere and the program will still remain equivalent. But I want to insert the minimum number of such five nodes. And if you do that, then it's called a minimal SSA. So what is a minimal SSA? The number of inserted five functions is as small as possible. I'm also going to call five nodes and five functions and vice versa. Some people call them five functions. Some people call them five nodes. Irrespective, a minimal SSA is defined as an SSA form in which the number of inserted five functions is as small as possible. So here's an example. So let's say there is a convergence point Z. So I will insert a phi here. But let's say Z was eventually going to W. Now, I don't need to insert a phi node at W in a minimal SSA. In a non-minimal SSA, you may insert a phi node in both Z and W. But a minimal SSA, you will only insert a phi node in Z and not in W. There's another form of SSA, which is called pruned SSA. And here it is one step even more optimized compared to minimal SSA, where they say that we forego placing a phi function at a convergence point Z if there are no more uses of V in or after Z. So for example, here, this is a convergence point. This is the first convergence point. But if V is not getting used anywhere after Z, then I don't put a phi node in Z. So irrespective of whether it is the first convergence point or not, if V is not being used in Z or after Z, then there's no need to place a phi node here. And this is called a pruned SSA. So there are two different definitions that I have introduced. Minimal SSA, where I put the phi node only at the first convergence points. And pruned SSA, where in addition to that constraint that we don't put at later convergence points, only the first convergence point, we also don't put phi nodes where we know that later on, V is not going to be used. In other words, if V is not live at that program location, then I don't need to put a phi node there. So we're going to discuss a translation algorithm to minimal SSA. And it's very easy to change it to also do pruned SSA. But I'm going to first discuss it in the context of minimal SSA. And the idea is we'll first identify the minimal set of convergence points and place trivial phi functions, functions or phi nodes at those convergence points. And we're going to use the idea of dominance frontiers to do this. And I'm going to explain what that means in our next module. And then we are going to rename the mentions of a variable V such that the use-def and defuse relationships remain unchanged so that we obey the property 3, which is that if I read any value in VL, it's the same as I would have read in the corresponding use of the original variable V. And this is called variable renaming. And this algorithm is going to be based on this paper called Efficiently Computing Static Single Assignment Form and Control Dependence Graph published in 1991. The interesting feature of this algorithm is that it does identify the minimal set of program locations where the phi node needs to be placed all at once rather than for each variable separately or something like that. And we're going to see how that works and how you can make that faster than the naive versions of that algorithm.
