Title: Compiler Design Module 75 : Global Optimization
Video ID: EI56VONzCcc
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

So now we'll start discussing global optimizations. Recall that global optimizations are optimizations that go beyond the scope of a single basic block. They need reasoning of the whole control flow graph, which may be within the body of a method. So here is an example. There are four basic blocks in this example. The first basic block basically assigns x to three, and then checks whether b is greater than zero, and depending on whether b is greater than zero, it assigns z plus w to y, or assigns zero to y. And then there is a join point to the fourth basic block where we have a is assigned two into x. Now the question I want to ask here is, can we replace a equals two into x with a equals six? So instead of actually doing the computation two into x, can I be sure that at this point x will always be three, and so I can just do constant propagation and replace this x by three and then two into three by six, and that would be constant folding. So if I look at this program, it seems like irrespective of what path the program takes, x would always be three, and so maybe it should be okay to replace x by three. But then let's change the example a little bit. What if I have x assigned to four on one of the branches, all right? So here on this branch now x is four, whereas on the other branch, x is three. And now can we replace a equals two into x with a equals six? And the answer obviously looks like it's a no, because if we're coming on this branch, then it is not going to be assigned six, but it's going to be assigned eight. 

So when can we replace the use of variable x with a constant k? And this is basically the problem of global constant propagation. So you've already seen constant propagation in the context of a single basic block in the context of local optimization, but now we want to talk about global optimizations, and in this we want to know whether it's okay to replace x with a constant k. In this case, in the example that we're looking at, the value of k was three. So the answer is, well, it is okay to do this if on every path to the use of x, the last assignment to x is x equals k, right? So x has been assigned the value k, the constant k on every path that is reaching that use of x. 

So let's look at this example again. Is this condition true? Well, how many paths are there? So we can also say that maybe the program has more things above these four basic blocks, and it may have more things below the last basic block, but there's no other incoming edges to this basic block and this basic block, right? There may be other incoming edges to the top and the bottom basic blocks, but none to the left and right. So irrespective of what paths the program takes, it seems like the last assignment to x would always be x equals three, right? I could have come through any paths to the first basic block, and I could have gone on any path after the last basic block, but irrespective, I'm always going to have x equals three on any path that the program takes. By the time it reaches this fourth basic block, then we are guaranteed that x is going to be three. And so in this particular example, the answer is yes. It is okay to replace a equals two to x with a equals six. 

But in this example, the answer is no, because on one of the paths, or not one, maybe many more, because there could be multiple paths that are coming in to the first basic block. And so some of the paths that basically take this true branch, x is equal to four, and so the k value is four here, but then on the other branch, it is three. And so it's not the same k value that is being assigned to x on all the paths that are reaching the fourth basic block, which contains a equals two into x. So the answer is no. So the question is, how do we design an algorithm that's going to do this for us? 

And such an algorithm will be called a global constant propagation algorithm. And now I just make it a little bit more interesting. So I have the same basic block diagram, but I just made another loop. So maybe there's a loop which checks y is greater than zero. If true, then loop back to this basic block. And if y is greater than zero is false, then come back to the fourth basic block. And now is it okay to replace a equals two into x with a equals six? Well, once again, there could be multiple incoming paths to the first basic block. There could be multiple outgoing paths from the last basic block. But irrespective of what path it is, there could be multiple paths. Either I could just come in here and come here, or I could come on the false branch and come to the last basic block. Or I could come on the true branch, go around the loop a few times and then come to the last basic block. Irrespective of what path the program takes, I'm confident that x would always be three because on this loop, x is not getting assigned. And on the false branch also, x is not getting assigned. So the last assignment to x on all these paths, which is actually an infinite number of paths, because the loop could be taken any number of times. We are sure that the last assignment to x is x equals three. And so it's okay to change it. And the answer here is also yes. 

So this algorithm of global constant propagation requires a class of algorithms which are called global data and flow analysis. So basically this kind of reasoning is required for many different types of optimization problems in compilers. And so it helps to basically create a common framework in which we can implement the same logic, but with different kind of properties so that there's reuse of the same idea. 

So in general, global optimization tasks share several traits. Just like we saw global constant propagation, there are some other algorithms that we're going to see which are going to have different properties, but similar traits. And what are those traits? Optimization depends on knowing property x at a certain program point P, right? So for example, we were interested in knowing whether x equals k is the last assignment on all possible paths at the program point of the last basic block, right? So that is the property x in this case is, is x equals k the last assignment to x on all possible paths? And the program point P is the fourth basic block which contained the statement A equals two into x. Further proving x at P requires knowledge of entire program. So to be able to say that x equals k is the last instruction on all possible paths that can reach program point P, I need to know the characteristics of the entire program because I'm to be able to reason about, all possible paths, I need to be able to know the entire program. So that's another kind of common property, common kind of trait of these global optimization problems. Proving x at P requires knowledge of the entire program. Unlike local optimization where we didn't require the knowledge of the entire program, we were only looking at the current basic block. Here, although the transformation is being made in the basic block, the transformation relies on a property that relies on the characteristics of the entire program. And finally, it is okay to be conservative. So it's okay to be, so the kind of answers that these algorithms give is either it says x, the property x is definitely true, or it can say, I don't know whether x is true or not. And if the algorithm says I don't know, that's a conservative answer. So that's like saying, okay, I can't really say, so please don't do the optimization, all right? So that's the conservative answer, all right? So don't know is the conservative answer. And it's always okay to be conservative, right? I mean, because if you're conservative, then you're not going to do the optimization and that's okay. I mean, at least you didn't make the program incorrect. Of course, you would want to be as non-conservative as possible. You would want this answer as much as possible, x is definitely true. But sometimes you may not be able to, for sure say, and then in that case, you can just say that, okay, I don't know whether x is true or not. There could be a third possibility of an answer, which says I know that x is definitely not true, but that's not really interesting to us. That's as good as saying that I don't know whether x is true or not. Because if x is not true, then how does it matter to my optimization algorithm? Let's look at the example of constant propagation. Even if I know that the x is equal to three is not the last assignment on some parts, that doesn't really help me with anything. So I could just say that, okay, I really don't know whether x is a constant or not. So I really cared about only two answers. One is, are you sure that x is equal to k at all parts? And the other answer is no, I'm not sure. So that's all, right? Okay, so it's okay to be conservative and you can either say x is definitely true or say don't know if x is true. And this is a common trait shared by many global optimization algorithms. Including the global constant propagation example that we just saw.
