Title: Compiler Design Module 182 : Exponential Paths Problem
Video ID: 184BagkqU4I
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

So we've been discussing the conditional if-then-else operator, and in this module, I'm going to talk about predicated instructions and how predicated instructions and if-then-else operators are kind of interchangeable. So let's assume that this is our input program. If some Boolean condition B on the machine state, then assign to X some expression alpha, assign to Y some expression beta, else assign to X some expression gamma, and assign to Z some expression delta. Now notice that on the then branch and the else branch, X is updated both on the then branch and the else branch, whereas Y is updated only on the then branch and Z is updated only on the else branch. And another way to kind of write the same program is using the ternary operator in C, which is the question mark and the colon, which is basically represented using the question mark character and the colon character. So for example, I can say X colon equals B question mark alpha colon gamma, which means if B is true, then assign alpha to X, else assign gamma to X. So this is the ternary operator. On a machine architecture, there are instructions like the conditional move instructions which are basically some forms of the ternary operator. Similarly, for Y, we can say that if B is true, then assign beta, else just assign the old value of Y. Similarly, if for Z, we can say if B is true, then assign the old value of Z, otherwise assign delta. And the point I want to make here is that these two programs are equivalent. And so any proof obligation, any whole triple, for example, with precondition P and post condition Q that holds on the original program will also hold on this new program which uses predicated instructions without any control flow and vice versa. So there's this equivalence symbol that I've drawn for the two settings. This program and this program are equivalent, which basically means that any precondition P and any post condition Q that holds for one as a whole triple will hold for the other. Recall that for proving any proof obligation for the original program, which is the if-then-else program, we basically used extra predicates P1, P2, P3, P4, and then we also had a strategy on identifying what this P1, P2, P3, P4 should be. And based on that, we kind of found the proof obligations. What would be the corresponding strategy to identify the verification conditions for the program on the right? And how do the two verification conditions compare? This is the topic of discussion in today's module. So let's look at this particular assignment instruction. X colon equals some Boolean condition B question mark, Y colon Z. And the precondition that we want is P and the post condition that we want to ensure is Q. So this is nothing different about this from any other assignment operator. This whole expression on the right-hand side of the assignment operator is basically some expression, let's say beta, and that's what goes here in our encoding for the corresponding proof obligation when we basically use the assignment rule. So recall that the whole encoding for this assignment rule is for all X, Y, Z, which represent the machine state, P, which is the precondition, implies Q where within Q, which where X has been replaced with the expression on the right of the assignment, which is B question mark, Y colon Z. Notice that this whole thing represents an expression which evaluates to Y if B was true and evaluates to Z if B was false. So there's nothing remarkable about dealing with predicated instructions. I also call these instructions that use the conditional operator predicated instructions where B forms our predicate, which determines what should go into X. But the basic treatment of these predicated instructions is not any different from the treatment of a simple assignment operator. Let's look at an example to see this more concretely. So let's say I have a program that says A colon equals, if A is greater than zero, this forms are B, then A else minus A. So A greater than zero, question mark, A colon minus A. And the precondition is A equals A naught for some constant A naught. And the post condition that we're interested in proving is A equals modulus of A naught. So if I was to use my assignment operator rule, I'm going to, the machine state here is just formed of a single variable A. And so for all A, if A equals A naught, that's P, so this becomes P, implies Q, Q is A equals mod of A naught. And notice that A has to be replaced because I'm going to replace A with A greater, this whole expression on the RHS. So this whole expression on the RHS becomes my A, with my new A. And this is nothing but A is greater than zero, then A else minus A. And so basically my proof obligation is if A equals A naught, then this whole expression equals modulus of A naught. And it's easy to see that this expression, this whole proof obligation evaluates to true for all possible values of A naught and A. And so this is basically the proof obligation of the verification condition that gets generated for this particular whole triple. And in this example, that evaluates to true. All right. So now we have seen the conditional operator and predicated instructions. I'm going to discuss the exponential paths problem. That's a common problem in dealing with this kind of, if then else operator. These if then else operators bring nonlinearity into the program, because depending on what the condition is, the program will execute this set of instructions or that set of instructions. Or even if I look at predicated instructions, it will either take X1 or X2. And so that causes the program to have many different behaviors that need not have very well behaved correspondences with each other. And so that causes an exponential paths problem, as I'm going to explain very soon. So let's say my program is made up of two conditional statements concatenated with each other. So this is basically the sequence operator, let's say semicolon in C. And basically the first statement says if B1, then X is assigned X1, where X1 is some expression, just like B1 is some expression that evaluates to a true Boolean value. Else X equals X2, X is assigned X2. And then I execute an other statement, which is also a conditional statement. Say if B2, then X is assigned X3, else X is assigned X4. If I was to draw the corresponding control flow graph, it would look something like the following. If B1 is true, then I go to the left. If B1 is false, then I go to the right. If B1 is true, then I assign X1 to X. So I'm representing it in shorthand as X1, written in this edge. And if B1 is false, then assign X2 to X. And then I come to the same point. And this is the meet point, which is represented by this line or the semicolon operator that I've shown here. And then once again, I branch on B2. And depending on whether B2 is true or not, I assign X3 or X4 respectively. The other way to write this as predicated instructions is X is assigned small x1 or x2 depending on B1, whether B1 is true or false respectively. And similarly, X is assigned X3 or X4 depending on whether B2 is true or false respectively. So what is the verification condition that comes out for any kind of whole triple for such a program? So when I try to express X at the end of the program in terms of the values of the machine state or the variables at the beginning of the program, then I'm going to get something like the following. So if I am here, I would say X equals B1, question mark, X1 colon X2, which means that basically that is what the value of X is at this point. And if I say what is the value of X at the end of the program, I'm gonna say it's B2, question mark. So if this middle value was, let's say some y, then this value at the end is going to be B2, question mark, X3 of y colon X4 of y because X3 and X4 are nothing but expressions on the current value of X, which in this case is y. So that's what it's going to value it to. In fact, I can even say B2 of y, question mark, X3 y colon X4 y. And then if I expand y in turn, I'm going to say y equals B1, question mark, X1 colon X2. And in this case, the arguments of X1, X2, and B1 are going to be the original value of X, let's say X or X naught or anything like that. And if I kind of expand this expression completely, then I'm going to get this long expression which says B2 of B1, question mark, X1 colon X2, question mark, X3 of B1, question mark, X1 colon X2, colon X4 of B1, question mark, X1 colon X2. So what do we see here? We see that this whole expression, B1, question mark, X1, colon X2 is being repeated, actually it's being triplicated because of the substitution that we are doing to basically obtain the value at the end of the program. And in fact, if I kind of continue this and add another diamond-shaped structure to my control flow graph, which represents three sequences, a sequence of three if-then-else statements, then I basically explored this copying business again. So my expression is going to be B3 of, that long expression that I had on the previous slide, question mark, X5 of B2, question mark, the whole long expression that we had earlier, colon X6, and this whole expression repeated again. And overall, we can see that the expression size is growing exponentially with the number of these diamond-shaped structures that have been put together in the sequence. This can also be seen in a different kind of, in the previous slide, I kind of reasoned about it using the predicated instructions. If I reason about the same thing using, let's say, if-then-else structures, and I basically use my sequencing logic here and say, if I have to prove this whole triple that says, if precondition P holds at the beginning, then precondition, postcondition Q holds at the end, then I need to find P1 and P2, and P3, P4, and so on at the intermediate point such that I can discharge my verification conditions. And then I choose my P1, P2, P3, P4, such that P2, for example, is somewhere here. So P2 would be Q, such that X is replaced with B3, question mark, X3 colon, X5 colon, X6. So that was what we had from our sequencing rule for the conditional operator. That's what we actually got as a potential strategy to identify what P2 should be. And similarly, P1 would be P2, such that X has been replaced with B2, question mark, X3 colon, X4, and so on. And eventually, I'm going to end up with an expression a proof obligation which says P implies Q with three different substitutions. The first substitution is going to be X is replaced with this expression, B3, question mark, X5, colon, X6. Then the second substitution on this already substituted expression is going to be X is replaced with B2, question mark, X3, colon, X4. And finally, I'm going to do the substitution that X is replaced with B1, question mark, X1, colon, X2. And once I do all these replacements in sequence, you can see that by the time I'm at the second replacement, I'm going to have to substitute X in multiple places. And that's going to create copies of the RHS. And the number of copies is just going to increase exponentially. And so even this proof obligation remains exponential. So irrespective of how you look at it, whether you look at it as the computation of the variable as an expression for the whole program going forward, or whether you look at it as a precondition of Q going backward, the expression that you end up with is going to look something like this, like the expression that I have written here. And that can be worst case exponential in the number of lines of code in the program, especially if you have this kind of, if then else structure, which is composed together in a sequence. And this is also what I call the exponential paths problem.
